INFO-DIR-SECTION Games
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* xboard: (xboard).         An X Window System graphical chessboard.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY

Introduction
************

XBoard is a graphical chessboard that can serve as a user interface to
chess engines (such as GNU Chess), the Internet Chess Servers,
electronic mail correspondence chess, or your own collection of saved
games.

   This manual documents version 4.8.0 of XBoard.

1 Major modes
*************

XBoard always runs in one of four major modes.  You select the major
mode from the command line when you start up XBoard.

xboard [options]
     As an interface to GNU Chess or another chess engine running on
     your machine, XBoard lets you play a game against the machine, set
     up arbitrary positions, force variations, watch a game between two
     chess engines, interactively analyze your stored games or set up
     and analyze arbitrary positions.  (Note: Not all chess engines
     support analysis.)

xboard -ics -icshost hostname [options]
     As Internet Chess Server (ICS) interface, XBoard lets you play
     against other ICS users, observe games they are playing, or review
     games that have recently finished.  Most of the ICS "wild" chess
     variants are supported, including bughouse.

xboard -ncp [options]
     XBoard can also be used simply as an electronic chessboard to play
     through games. It will read and write game files and allow you to
     play through variations manually. You can use it to browse games
     off the net or review games you have saved.  These features are
     also available in the other modes.

|pxboard
     If you want to pipe games into XBoard, use the supplied shell
     script `pxboard'.  For example, from the news reader `xrn', find a
     message with one or more games in it, click the Save button, and
     type `|pxboard' as the file name.

cmail [options]
     As an interface to electronic mail correspondence chess, XBoard
     works with the cmail program. See *note CMail:: below for
     instructions.

2 Basic operation
*****************

To move a piece, you can drag it with the left mouse button, or you can
click the left mouse button once on the piece, then once more on the
destination square. In crazyhouse, bughouse or shogi you can drag and
drop pieces to the board from the holdings squares displayed next to
the board.

   Old behavior, where right-clicking a square brings up a menu where
you can select what piece to drop on it can still be selected through
the `Drop Menu' option.  Only in Edit Position mode right and middle
clicking a square is still used to put a piece on it, and the piece to
drop is selected by sweeping the mouse vertically with the button held
down.

   The default function of the right mouse button in other modes is to
display the position the chess program thinks it will end up in.  While
moving the mouse vertically with this button pressed XBoard will step
through the principal variation to show how this position will be
reached.  Lines of play displayed in the engine-output window, or PGN
variations in the comment window can similarly be played out on the
board, by right-clicking on them.  Only in Analysis mode, when you walk
along a PV, releasing the mouse button will forward the game upto that
point, like you entered all previous PV moves.  As the display of the
PV in that case starts after the first move a simple right-click will
play the move the engine indicates.

   In Analysis mode you can also make a move by grabbing the piece with
a double-click of the left mouse button (or while keeping the Ctrl key
pressed).  In this case the move you enter will not be played, but will
be excluded from the analysis of the current position.  (Or included if
it was already excluded; it is a toggle.)  This only works for engines
that support this feature.

   When connected to an ICS, it is possible to call up a graphical
representation of players seeking a game in stead of the chess board,
when the latter is not in use (i.e. when you are not playing or
observing).  Left-clicking the display area will switch between this
'seek graph' and the chess board.  Hovering the mouse pointer over a
dot will show the details of the seek ad in the message field above the
board.  Left-clicking the dot will challenge that player.
Right-clicking a dot will 'push it to the back', to reveal any dots
that were hidden behind it.  Right-clicking off dots will refresh the
graph.

   Most other XBoard commands are available from the menu bar. The most
frequently used commands also have shortcut keys or on-screen buttons.
These shortcut keystrokes are mostly non-printable characters.  Typing
a letter or digit while the board window has focus will bring up a
type-in box with the typed letter already in it.  You can use that to
type a move in siuations where it is your turn to enter a move, type a
move number to call up the position after that move in the display, or,
in Edit Position mode, type a FEN.  Some rarely used parameters can
only be set through options on the command line used to invoke XBoard.

   XBoard uses a settings file, in which it can remember any changes to
the settings that are made through menus or command-line options, so
they will still apply when you restart XBoard for another session.  The
settings can be saved into this file automatically when XBoard exits,
or on explicit request of the user.  The default name for the settings
file is /etc/xboard/xboard.conf, but in a standard install this file is
only used as a master settings file that determines the system-wide
default settings, and defers reading and writing of user settings to a
user-specific file like ~/.xboardrc in the user's home directory.

   When XBoard is iconized, its graphical icon is a white knight if it
is White's turn to move, a black knight if it is Black's turn.

3 Menus, buttons, and keys
**************************

3.1 File Menu
=============

New Game
     Resets XBoard and the chess engine to the beginning of a new chess
     game. The `Ctrl-N' key is a keyboard equivalent. In Internet Chess
     Server mode, clears the current state of XBoard, then
     resynchronizes with the ICS by sending a refresh command. If you
     want to stop playing, observing, or examining an ICS game, use an
     appropriate command from the Action menu, not `New Game'.  *Note
     Action Menu::.

New Shuffle Game
     Similar to `New Game', but allows you to specify a particular
     initial position (according to a standardized numbering system) in
     chess variants which use randomized opening positions (e.g.
     Chess960).  You can also press the `Pick Fixed' button to let
     XBoard generate a random number for you.  The thus selected
     opening position will then persistently be chosen on any following
     New Game command until you use this menu to select another.
     Selecting position number -1 (or pushing the `Randomize' button)
     will produce a newly randomized position on any new game.  Using
     this menu item in variants that normally do not shuffle their
     opening position does cause these variants to become shuffle
     variants until you use the `New Shuffle Game' menu to explicitly
     switch the randomization off, or select a new variant.

New Variant
     Allows you to select a new chess variant in non-ICS mode.  (In ICS
     play, the ICS is responsible for deciding which variant will be
     played, and XBoard adapts automatically.)  The shifted `Alt+V' key
     is a keyboard equivalent. If you play with an engine, the engine
     must be able to play the selected variant, or the command will be
     ignored.  XBoard supports all major variants, such as xiangqi,
     shogi, chess, chess960, Capablanca Chess, shatranj, crazyhouse,
     bughouse.  But not every board size has built-in bitmaps for
     un-orthodox pieces!  Only sizes bulky (72) and middling (49) have
     all pieces, while size petite (33) has most.  These sizes would
     have to be set at startup through the `size' command-line option
     when you start up XBoard for such variants to be playable.

     You can overrule the default board format of the selected variant,
     (e.g. to play suicide chess on a 6 x 6 board), in this dialog, but
     normally you would not do that, and leave them at '-1', which
     means 'default'.

Load Game
     Plays a game from a record file. The `Ctrl-O' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.  A pop-up dialog prompts you for the file name. If the
     file contains more than one game, a second pop-up dialog displays
     a list of games (with information drawn from their PGN tags, if
     any), and you can select the one you want. Alternatively, you can
     load the Nth game in the file directly, by typing the number `N'
     after the file name, separated by a space.

     The game file parser will accept PGN (portable game notation), or
     in fact almost any file that contains moves in algebraic notation.
     Notation of the form `P@f7' is accepted for piece-drops in
     bughouse games; this is a nonstandard extension to PGN.  If the
     file includes a PGN position (FEN tag), or an old-style XBoard
     position diagram bracketed by `[--' and `--]' before the first
     move, the game starts from that position. Text enclosed in
     parentheses, square brackets, or curly braces is assumed to be
     commentary and is displayed in a pop-up window. Any other text in
     the file is ignored. PGN variations (enclosed in parentheses) also
     are treated as comments; however, if you rights-click them in the
     comment window, XBoard will shelve the current line, and load the
     the selected variation, so you can step through it.  You can later
     revert to the previous line with the `Revert' command.  This way
     you can walk quite complex varation trees with XBoard.  The
     nonstandard PGN tag [Variant "varname"] functions similarly to the
     -variant command-line option (see below), allowing games in
     certain chess variants to be loaded.  Note that it must appear
     before any FEN tag for XBoard to recognize variant FENs
     appropriately.  There is also a heuristic to recognize chess
     variants from the Event tag, by looking for the strings that the
     Internet Chess Servers put there when saving variant ("wild")
     games.

Load Position
     Sets up a position from a position file.  A pop-up dialog prompts
     you for the file name.  The shifted `Ctrl-O' key is a keyboard
     equivalent. If the file contains more than one saved position, and
     you want to load the Nth one, type the number N after the file
     name, separated by a space. Position files must be in FEN
     (Forsythe-Edwards notation), or in the format that the Save
     Position command writes when oldSaveStyle is turned on.

Load Next Position
     Loads the next position from the last position file you loaded.
     The shifted `PgDn' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Load Previous Position
     Loads the previous position from the last position file you
     loaded. The shifted `PgUp' key is a keyboard equivalent.  Not
     available if the last position was loaded from a pipe.

Save Game
     Appends a record of the current game to a file.  The `Ctrl-S' key
     is a keyboard equivalent.  A pop-up dialog prompts you for the
     file name. If the game did not begin with the standard starting
     position, the game file includes the starting position used. Games
     are saved in the PGN (portable game notation) format, unless the
     oldSaveStyle option is true, in which case they are saved in an
     older format that is specific to XBoard. Both formats are
     human-readable, and both can be read back by the `Load Game'
     command.  Notation of the form `P@f7' is accepted for piece-drops
     in bughouse games; this is a nonstandard extension to PGN.

Save Position
     Appends a diagram of the current position to a file.  The shifted
     `Ctrl+S' key is a keyboard equivalent.  A pop-up dialog prompts
     you for the file name. Positions are saved in FEN
     (Forsythe-Edwards notation) format unless the `oldSaveStyle'
     option is true, in which case they are saved in an older,
     human-readable format that is specific to XBoard. Both formats can
     be read back by the `Load Position' command.

Save Selected Games
     Will cause all games selected for display in the current Game List
     to be appended to a file of the user's choice.

Save Games as Book
     Creates an opening book from the currently loaded game file,
     incorporating only the games currently selected in the Game List.
     The book will be saved on the file specified in the `Common Engine'
     options dialog.  The value of `Book Depth' specified in that same
     dialog will be used to determine how many moves of each game will
     be added to the internal book buffer.  This command can take a
     long time to process, and the size of the buffer is currently
     limited.  At the end the buffer will be saved as a Polyglot book,
     but the buffer will not be cleared, so that you can continue
     adding games from other game files.

Mail Move
Reload CMail Message
     See *note CMail::.

Exit
     Exits from XBoard. The `Ctrl-Q' key is a keyboard equivalent.

3.2 Edit Menu
=============

Copy Game
     Copies a record of the current game to an internal clipboard in PGN
     format and sets the X selection to the game text. The `Ctrl-C' key
     is a keyboard equivalent. The game can be pasted to another
     application (such as a text editor or another copy of XBoard)
     using that application's paste command.  In many X applications,
     such as xterm and emacs, the middle mouse button can be used for
     pasting; in XBoard, you must use the Paste Game command.

Copy Position
     Copies the current position to an internal clipboard in FEN format
     and sets the X selection to the position text. The shifted
     `Ctrl-C' key is a keyboard equivalent.  The position can be pasted
     to another application (such as a text editor or another copy of
     XBoard) using that application's paste command.  In many X
     applications, such as xterm and emacs, the middle mouse button can
     be used for pasting; in XBoard, you must use the Paste Position
     command.

Copy Game List
     Copies the current game list to the clipboard, and sets the X
     selection to this text.  A format of comma-separated double-quoted
     strings is used, including all tags, so it can be easily imported
     into spread-sheet programs.

Paste Game
     Interprets the current X selection as a game record and loads it,
     as with Load Game. The `Ctrl-V' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Paste Position
     Interprets the current X selection as a FEN position and loads it,
     as with Load Position. The shifted `Ctrl-V' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.

Edit Game
     Allows you to make moves for both Black and White, and to change
     moves after backing up with the `Backward' command. The clocks do
     not run. The `Ctrl-E' key is a keyboard equivalent.

     In chess engine mode, the chess engine continues to check moves
     for legality but does not participate in the game. You can bring
     the chess engine into the game by selecting `Machine White',
     `Machine Black', or `Two Machines'.

     In ICS mode, the moves are not sent to the ICS: `Edit Game' takes
     XBoard out of ICS Client mode and lets you edit games locally.  If
     you want to edit games on ICS in a way that other ICS users can
     see, use the ICS `examine' command or start an ICS match against
     yourself.

Edit Position
     Lets you set up an arbitrary board position.  The shifted `Ctrl-E'
     key is a keyboard equivalent.  Use mouse button 1 to drag pieces
     to new squares, or to delete a piece by dragging it off the board
     or dragging an empty square on top of it.  To drop a new piece on
     a square, press mouse button 2 or 3 over the square.  This puts a
     white or black pawn in the square, respectively, but you can
     change that to any other piece type by dragging the mouse down
     before you release the button.  You will then see the piece on the
     originally clicked square cycle through the available pieces
     (including those of opposite color), and can release the button
     when you see the piece you want.  To alter the side to move, you
     can click the clock (the words White and Black above the board) of
     the side you want to give the move to.  To clear the board you can
     click the clock of the side that alread has the move (which is
     highlighted in black).  The old behavior with a piece menu can
     still be configured with the aid of the `pieceMenu' option.
     Selecting `Edit Position' causes XBoard to discard all remembered
     moves in the current game.

     In ICS mode, changes made to the position by `Edit Position' are
     not sent to the ICS: `Edit Position' takes XBoard out of `ICS
     Client' mode and lets you edit positions locally. If you want to
     edit positions on ICS in a way that other ICS users can see, use
     the ICS `examine' command, or start an ICS match against yourself.
     (See also the ICS Client topic above.)

Edit Tags
     Lets you edit the PGN (portable game notation) tags for the
     current game. After editing, the tags must still conform to the
     PGN tag syntax:

          <tag-section> ::= <tag-pair> <tag-section>
                                  <empty>
          <tag-pair> ::= [ <tag-name> <tag-value> ]
          <tag-name> ::= <identifier>
          <tag-value> ::= <string>
     See the PGN Standard for full details. Here is an example:

          [Event "Portoroz Interzonal"]
          [Site "Portoroz, Yugoslavia"]
          [Date "1958.08.16"]
          [Round "8"]
          [White "Robert J. Fischer"]
          [Black "Bent Larsen"]
          [Result "1-0"]
     Any characters that do not match this syntax are silently ignored.
     Note that the PGN standard requires all games to have at least the
     seven tags shown above. Any that you omit will be filled in by
     XBoard with `?' (unknown value), or `-' (inapplicable value).

Edit Comment
     Adds or modifies a comment on the current position. Comments are
     saved by `Save Game' and are displayed by `Load Game', PGN
     variations will also be printed in this window, and can be
     promoted to main line by right-clicking them.  `Forward', and
     `Backward'.

Edit Book
     Pops up a window listing the moves available in the GUI book
     (specified in the `Common Engine Settings' dialog) from the
     currently displayed position, together with their weights and
     (optionally in braces) learn info.  You can then edit this list,
     and the new list will be stored back into the book when you press
     OK.  Note that the listed percentages are neither used, nor
     updated when you change the weights; they are just there as an
     optical aid.

Revert
Annotate
     If you are examining an ICS game and Pause mode is off, Revert
     issues the ICS command `revert'.  In local mode, when you were
     editing or analyzing a game, and the `-variations' command-line
     option is switched on, you can start a new variation by holding
     the Shift key down while entering a move not at the end of the
     game.  Variations can also become the currently displayed line by
     clicking a PGN variation displayed in the Comment window.  This
     can be applied recursively, so that you can analyze variations on
     variations; each time you create a new variation by entering an
     alternative move with Shift pressed, or select a new one from the
     Comment window, the current variation will be shelved.  `Revert'
     allows you to return to the most recently shelved variation.  The
     difference between `Revert' and `Annotate' is that with the latter,
     the variation you are now abandoning will be added as a comment
     (in PGN variation syntax, i.e. between parentheses) to the
     original move where you deviated, for later recalling.  The `Home'
     key is a keyboard equivalent to `Revert'.

Truncate Game
     Discards all remembered moves of the game beyond the current
     position. Puts XBoard into `Edit Game' mode if it was not there
     already.  The `End' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Backward
     Steps backward through a series of remembered moves.  The `[<]'
     button and the `Alt+LeftArrow' key are equivalents, as is turning
     the mouse wheel towards you.  In addition, pressing the Control
     key steps back one move, and releasing it steps forward again.

     In most modes, `Backward' only lets you look back at old positions;
     it does not retract moves. This is the case if you are playing
     against a chess engine, playing or observing a game on an ICS, or
     loading a game.  If you select `Backward' in any of these
     situations, you will not be allowed to make a different move. Use
     `Retract Move' or `Edit Game' if you want to change past moves.

     If you are examining an ICS game, the behavior of `Backward'
     depends on whether XBoard is in Pause mode. If Pause mode is off,
     `Backward' issues the ICS backward command, which backs up
     everyone's view of the game and allows you to make a different
     move. If Pause mode is on, `Backward' only backs up your local
     view.

Forward
     Steps forward through a series of remembered moves (undoing the
     effect of `Backward') or forward through a game file. The `[>]'
     button and the `Alt+RightArrow' key are equivalents, as is turning
     the mouse wheel away from you.

     If you are examining an ICS game, the behavior of Forward depends
     on whether XBoard is in Pause mode. If Pause mode is off,
     `Forward' issues the ICS forward command, which moves everyone's
     view of the game forward along the current line. If Pause mode is
     on, `Forward' only moves your local view forward, and it will not
     go past the position that the game was in when you paused.

Back to Start
     Jumps backward to the first remembered position in the game.  The
     `[<<]' button and the `Alt+Home' key are equivalents.

     In most modes, Back to Start only lets you look back at old
     positions; it does not retract moves. This is the case if you are
     playing against a local chess engine, playing or observing a game
     on a chess server, or loading a game. If you select `Back to
     Start' in any of these situations, you will not be allowed to make
     different moves. Use `Retract Move' or `Edit Game' if you want to
     change past moves; or use Reset to start a new game.

     If you are examining an ICS game, the behavior of `Back to Start'
     depends on whether XBoard is in Pause mode. If Pause mode is off,
     `Back to Start' issues the ICS `backward 999999' command, which
     backs up everyone's view of the game to the start and allows you
     to make different moves. If Pause mode is on, `Back to Start' only
     backs up your local view.

Forward to End
     Jumps forward to the last remembered position in the game. The
     `[>>]' button and the `Alt+End' key are equivalents.

     If you are examining an ICS game, the behavior of `Forward to End'
     depends on whether XBoard is in Pause mode. If Pause mode is off,
     `Forward to End' issues the ICS `forward 999999' command, which
     moves everyone's view of the game forward to the end of the
     current line. If Pause mode is on, `Forward to End' only moves
     your local view forward, and it will not go past the position that
     the game was in when you paused.

3.3 View Menu
=============

Flip View
     Inverts your view of the chess board for the duration of the
     current game. Starting a new game returns the board to normal.
     The `F2' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Show Engine Output
     Shows or hides a window in which the thinking output of any loaded
     engines is displayed. The shifted `Alt+O' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.  XBoard will display lines of thinking output of the
     same depth ordered by score, (highest score on top), rather than
     in the order the engine produced them.  Usually this amounts to
     the same, as a normal engine search will only find new PV (and
     emit it as thinking output) when it searches a move with a higher
     score than the previous variation.  But when the engine is in
     multi-variation mode this needs not always be true, and it is more
     convenient for someone analyzing games to see the moves sorted by
     score.  The order in which the engine found them is only of
     interest to the engine author, and can still be deduced from the
     time or node count printed with the line.  Right-clicking a line
     in this window, and then moving the mouse vertically with the
     right button kept down, will make XBoard play through the PV
     listed there.  The use of the board window as 'variation board'
     will normally end when you release the right button, or when the
     opponent plays a move.  But beware: in Analysis mode, moves thus
     played out will be added to the game.  The Engine-Output pane for
     each engine will contain a header displaying the multi-PV status
     and a list of excluded moves in Analysis mode, which are also
     responsive to right-clicking.

Show Move History
     Shows or hides a list of moves of the current game.  The shifted
     `Alt+H' key is a keyboard equivalent.  This list allows you to
     move the display to any earlier position in the game by clicking
     on the corresponding move.

Show Evaluation Graph
     Shows or hides a window which displays a graph of how the engine
     score(s) evolved as a function of the move number.  The shifted
     `Alt+E' key is a keyboard equivalent.  Clicking on the graph will
     bring the corresponding position in the board display.

Show Game List
     Shows or hides the list of games generated by the last `Load Game'
     command. The shifted `Alt+G' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Tags
     Pops up a window which shows the PGN (portable game notation) tags
     for the current game.  For now this is a duplicate of the `Edit
     Tags' item in the `Edit' menu.

Comments
     Pops up a window which shows any comments to or variations on the
     current move.  For now this is a duplicate of the `Edit Comment'
     item in the `Edit' menu.

ICS Input Box
     If this option is set in ICS mode, XBoard creates an extra window
     that you can use for typing in ICS commands.  The input box is
     especially useful if you want to type in something long or do some
     editing on your input, because output from ICS doesn't get mixed
     in with your typing as it would in the main terminal window.

Open Chat Window
     This menu item opens a window in which you can conduct upto 5 chats
     with other ICS users (or channels).  To use the window, write the
     name of your chat partner, the channel number, or the words
     'shouts', 'whispers', 'cshouts' in the upper field (closing with
     <Enter>).  Everything you type in the lowest field will then
     automatically be sent to the mentioned party, while everything
     that party sends to you will appear in the central text box,
     rather than appear in the ICS console.  The row of buttons allow
     you to choose between chat; to start a new chat, just select an
     empty button, and complete the `Chat partner' field.

Board
     Summons a dialog where you can customize the look of the chess
     board.  Here you can specify the directory from which piece images
     should be taken, when you don't want to use the built-in piece
     images (see `pieceImageDirectory' option), external images to be
     used for the board squares (`liteBackTextureFile' and
     `darkBackTextureFile' options), and square and piece colors for
     the default pieces.

Game List Tags
     a duplicate of the Game List dialog in the Options menu.

3.4 Mode Menu
=============

Machine White
     Tells the chess engine to play White.  The `Ctrl-W' key is a
     keyboard equivalent.

Machine Black
     Tells the chess engine to play Black.  The `Ctrl-B' key is a
     keyboard equivalent.

Two Machines
     Plays a game between two chess engines.  The `Ctrl-T' key is a
     keyboard equivalent.

Analysis Mode
     XBoard tells the chess engine to start analyzing the current
     game/position and shows you the analysis as you move pieces around.
     The `Ctrl-A' key is a keyboard equivalent.  Note: Some chess
     engines do not support Analysis mode.

     To set up a position to analyze, you do the following:

     1. Select Edit Position from the Mode Menu

     2. Set up the position.  Use the middle and right buttons to bring
     up the white and black piece menus.

     3. When you are finished, click on either the Black or White clock
     to tell XBoard which side moves first.

     4. Select Analysis Mode from the Mode Menu to start the analysis.

     You can now play legal moves to create follow-up positions for the
     engine to analyze, while the moves will be remembered as a stored
     game, and then step backward through this game to take the moves
     back.  Note that you can also click on the clocks to set the
     opposite side to move (adding a so-called `null move' to the game).

     You can also tell the engine to exclude some moves from analysis.
     (Engines that do not support the exclude-moves feature will ignore
     this, however.)  The general way to do this is to play the move
     you want to exclude starting with a double click on the piece.
     When you use drag-drop moving, the piece you grab with a double
     click will also remain on its square, to show you that you are not
     really making the move, but just forbid it from the current
     position.  Playing a thus excluded move a second time will include
     it again.  Excluded moves will be listed as text in a header line
     in the Engine Output window, and you can also re-include them by
     right-clicking them there.  This header line will also contain the
     words 'best' and 'tail'; right-clicking those will exclude the
     currently best move, or all moves not explicitly listed in the
     header line.  Once you leave the current position all memory of
     excluded moves will be lost when you return there.

     Selecting this menu item while already in `Analysis Mode' will
     toggle the participation of the second engine in the analysis.
     The output of this engine will then be shown in the lower pane of
     the Engine Output window.  The analysis function can also be used
     when observing games on an ICS with an engine loaded (zippy mode);
     the engine then will analyse the positions as they occur in the
     observed game.

Analyze Game
     This option subjects the currently loaded game to automatic
     analysis by the loaded engine.  The `Ctrl-G' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.  XBoard will start auto-playing the game from the
     currently displayed position, while the engine is analyzing the
     current position.  The game will be annotated with the results of
     these analyses.  In particlar, the score and depth will be added
     as a comment, and the PV will be added as a variation.

     Normally the analysis would stop after reaching the end of the
     game.  But when a game is loaded from a multi-game file while
     `Analyze Game' was already switched on, the analysis will continue
     with the next game in the file until the end of the file is
     reached (or you switch to another mode).

     The time the engine spends on analyzing each move can be controlled
     through the command-line option `-timeDelay', which can also be
     set from the `Load Game Options' menu dialog.  Note: Some chess
     engines do not support Analysis mode.

Edit Game
     Duplicate of the item in the Edit menu.  Note that `Edit Game' is
     the idle mode of XBoard, and can be used to get you out of other
     modes. E.g. to stop analyzing, stop a game between two engines or
     stop editing a position.

Edit Position
     Duplicate of the item in the Edit menu.

Training
     Training mode lets you interactively guess the moves of a game for
     one of the players. You guess the next move of the game by playing
     the move on the board. If the move played matches the next move of
     the game, the move is accepted and the opponent's response is
     auto-played.  If the move played is incorrect, an error message is
     displayed.  You can select this mode only while loading a game
     (that is, after selecting `Load Game' from the File menu).  While
     XBoard is in `Training' mode, the navigation buttons are disabled.

ICS Client
     This is the normal mode when XBoard is connected to a chess
     server.  If you have moved into Edit Game or Edit Position mode,
     you can select this option to get out.

     To use xboard in ICS mode, run it in the foreground with the -ics
     option, and use the terminal you started it from to type commands
     and receive text responses from the chess server.  See *note Chess
     Servers:: below for more information.

     XBoard activates some special position/game editing features when
     you use the `examine' or `bsetup' commands on ICS and you have
     `ICS Client' selected on the Mode menu.  First, you can issue the
     ICS position-editing commands with the mouse.  Move pieces by
     dragging with mouse button 1.  To drop a new piece on a square,
     press mouse button 2 or 3 over the square.  This brings up a menu
     of white pieces (button 2) or black pieces (button 3).  Additional
     menu choices let you empty the square or clear the board.  Click
     on the White or Black clock to set the side to play.  You cannot
     set the side to play or drag pieces to arbitrary squares while
     examining on ICC, but you can do so in `bsetup' mode on FICS.  In
     addition, the menu commands `Forward', `Backward', `Pause', and
     `Stop Examining' have special functions in this mode; see below.

Machine Match
     Starts a match between two chess programs, with a number of games
     and other parameters set through the `Match Options' menu dialog.
     When a match is already running, selecting this item will make
     XBoard drop out of match mode after the current game finishes.

Pause
     Pauses updates to the board, and if you are playing against a
     chess engine, also pauses your clock. To continue, select `Pause'
     again, and the display will automatically update to the latest
     position.  The `P' button and keyboard `Pause' key are equivalents.

     If you select Pause when you are playing against a chess engine and
     it is not your move, the chess engine's clock will continue to run
     and it will eventually make a move, at which point both clocks
     will stop. Since board updates are paused, however, you will not
     see the move until you exit from Pause mode (or select Forward).
     This behavior is meant to simulate adjournment with a sealed move.

     If you select Pause while you are observing or examining a game on
     a chess server, you can step backward and forward in the current
     history of the examined game without affecting the other observers
     and examiners, and without having your display jump forward to the
     latest position each time a move is made. Select Pause again to
     reconnect yourself to the current state of the game on ICS.

     If you select `Pause' while you are loading a game, the game stops
     loading. You can load more moves manually by selecting `Forward',
     or resume automatic loading by selecting `Pause' again.

3.5 Action Menu
===============

Accept
     Accepts a pending match offer.  The `F3' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.  If there is more than one offer pending, you will
     have to type in a more specific command instead of using this menu
     choice.

Decline
     Declines a pending offer (match, draw, adjourn, etc.).  The `F4'
     key is a keyboard equivalent. If there is more than one offer
     pending, you will have to type in a more specific command instead
     of using this menu choice.

Call Flag
     Calls your opponent's flag, claiming a win on time, or claiming a
     draw if you are both out of time.  The `F5' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.  You can also call your opponent's flag by clicking on
     his clock.

Draw
     Offers a draw to your opponent, accepts a pending draw offer from
     your opponent, or claims a draw by repetition or the 50-move rule,
     as appropriate. The `F6' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Adjourn
     Asks your opponent to agree to adjourning the current game, or
     agrees to a pending adjournment offer from your opponent.  The
     `F7' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Abort
     Asks your opponent to agree to aborting the current game, or
     agrees to a pending abort offer from your opponent.  The `F8' key
     is a keyboard equivalent. An aborted game ends immediately without
     affecting either player's rating.

Resign
     Resigns the game to your opponent. The `F9' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.

Stop Observing
     Ends your participation in observing a game, by issuing the ICS
     observe command with no arguments. ICS mode only.  The `F10' key
     is a keyboard equivalent.

Stop Examining
     Ends your participation in examining a game, by issuing the ICS
     unexamine command. ICS mode only.  The `F11' key is a keyboard
     equivalent.

Upload to Examine
     Create an examined game of the proper variant on the ICS, and send
     the game there that is currenty loaded in XBoard (e.g. through
     pasting or loading from file).  You must be connected to an ICS
     for this to work.

Adjudicate to White
Adjudicate to Black
Adjudicate Draw
     Terminate an ongoing game in Two-Machines mode (including match
     mode), with as result a win for white, for black, or a draw,
     respectively.  The PGN file of the game will accompany the result
     string by the comment "user adjudication".

3.6 Engine Menu
===============

Load Engine
     Pops up a dialog where you can select or specify an engine to be
     loaded.  You will always have to indicate whether you want to load
     the engine as first or second engine, through the ‘Load
     menitioned engine as’ drop-down list at the bottom of the dialog.
     You can even replace engines during a game, without disturbing
     that game.  (Beware that after loading an engine, XBoard will
     always be in Edit Game mode, so you will have to tell the new
     engine what to do before it does anything!)  When you select an
     already installed engine from the ‘Select Engine from List’
     drop-down list, all other fields of the dialog will be ignored.
     In other cases, you have to specify the engine executable,
     possible arguments on the engine command line (if the engine docs
     say the engine needs any), and the directory where the engine
     should look for its files (if this cannot be deduced automatically
     from the specification of the engine executable).  You will also
     have to specify (with the aid of checkboxes) if the engine is UCI.
     If ‘Add this engine to the list’ is ticked (which it is by
     default), the engine will be added to the list of installed
     engines in your settings file, (provided you save the settings!),
     so that next time you can select it from the drop-down list.  You
     can also specify a ‘nickname’, under which the engine will
     then appear in that drop-down list, and even choose to use that
     nickname for it in PGN files for engine-engine games.  The info
     you supply with the checkboxes whether the engine should use GUI
     book, or (for variant engines) automatically switch to the current
     variant when loaded, will also be included in the list.  For
     obsolete XBoard engines, which would normally take a long delay to
     load because XBoard is waiting for a response they will not give,
     you can tick ‘WB protocol v1’ to speed up the loading process.

Engine #N Settings
     Pop up a menu dialog to alter the settings specific to the
     applicable engine.  (The second engine is only accessible once it
     has been used in Two-Machines mode.)  For each parameter the
     engine allows to be set, a control element will appear in this
     dialog that can be used to alter the value.  Depending on the type
     of parameter (text string, number, multiple choice, on/off switch,
     instantaneous signal) the appropriate control will appear, with a
     description next to it.  XBoard has no idea what these values
     mean; it just passes them on to the engine.  How this dialog looks
     is completely determined by the engine, and XBoard just passes it
     on to the user.  Many engines do not have any parameters that can
     be set by the user, and in that case the dialog will be empty
     (except for the OK and cancel buttons).  UCI engines usually have
     many parameters. (But these are only visible with a sufficiently
     modern version of the Polyglot adapter needed to run UCI engines,
     e.g. Polyglot 1.4.55b.) For native XBoard engines this is less
     common.

Hint
     Displays a move hint from the chess engine.

Book
     Displays a list of possible moves from the chess engine's opening
     book.  The exact format depends on what chess engine you are using.
     With GNU Chess 4, the first column gives moves, the second column
     gives one possible response for each move, and the third column
     shows the number of lines in the book that include the move from
     the first column. If you select this option and nothing happens,
     the chess engine is out of its book or does not support this
     feature.

Move Now
     Forces the chess engine to move immediately. Chess engine mode
     only.  The `Ctrl-M' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Retract Move
     Retracts your last move. In chess engine mode, you can do this only
     after the chess engine has replied to your move; if the chess
     engine is still thinking, use `Move Now' first. In ICS mode,
     `Retract Move' issues the command `takeback 1' or `takeback 2'
     depending on whether it is your opponent's move or yours.  The
     `Ctrl-X' key is a keyboard equivalent.

Recently Used Engines
     At the bottom of the engine menu there can be a list of names of
     engines that you recently loaded through the Load Engine menu
     dialog in previous sessions.  Clicking on such a name will load
     that engine as first engine, so you won't have to search for it in
     your list of installed engines, if that is very long.  The maximum
     number of displayed engine names is set by the
     `recentEngines'command-line option.

3.7 Options Menu
================

3.7.1 General Options
---------------------

The following items to set option values appear in the dialog summoned
by the general Options menu item.
Absolute Analysis Scores
     Controls if scores on the Engine Output window during analysis
     will be printed from the white or the side-to-move point-of-view.

Almost Always Queen
     If this option is on, 7th-rank pawns automatically change into
     Queens when you pick them up, and when you drag them to the
     promotion square and release them there, they will promote to that.
     But when you drag such a pawn backwards first, its identity will
     start to cycle through the other available pieces.  This will
     continue until you start to move it forward; at which point the
     identity of the piece will be fixed, so that you can safely put it
     down on the promotion square.  If this option is off, what happens
     depends on the option `alwaysPromoteToQueen', which would force
     promotion to Queen when true.  Otherwise XBoard would bring up a
     dialog box whenever you move a pawn to the last rank, asking what
     piece you want to promote to.

Animate Dragging
     If Animate Dragging is on, while you are dragging a piece with the
     mouse, an image of the piece follows the mouse cursor.  If Animate
     Dragging is off, there is no visual feedback while you are
     dragging a piece, but if Animate Moving is on, the move will be
     animated when it is complete.

Animate Moving
     If Animate Moving is on, all piece moves are animated.  An image
     of the piece is shown moving from the old square to the new square
     when the move is completed (unless the move was already animated
     by Animate Dragging).  If Animate Moving is off, a moved piece
     instantly disappears from its old square and reappears on its new
     square when the move is complete.  The shifted `Ctrl-A' key is a
     keyboard equivalent.

Auto Flag
     If this option is on and one player runs out of time before the
     other, XBoard will automatically call his flag, claiming a win on
     time.  The shifted `Ctrl-F' key is a keyboard equivalent.  In ICS
     mode, Auto Flag will only call your opponent's flag, not yours,
     and the ICS may award you a draw instead of a win if you have
     insufficient mating material.  In local chess engine mode, XBoard
     may call either player's flag and will not take material into
     account (?).

Auto Flip View
     If the Auto Flip View option is on when you start a game, the board
     will be automatically oriented so that your pawns move from the
     bottom of the window towards the top.

     If you are playing a game on an ICS, the board is always oriented
     at the start of the game so that your pawns move from the bottom
     of the window towards the top. Otherwise, the starting orientation
     is determined by the `flipView' command line option; if it is
     false (the default), White's pawns move from bottom to top at the
     start of each game; if it is true, Black's pawns move from bottom
     to top. *Note User interface options::.

Blindfold
     If this option is on, XBoard displays the board as usual but does
     not display pieces or move highlights.  You can still move in the
     usual way (with the mouse or by typing moves in ICS mode), even
     though the pieces are invisible.

Drop Menu
     Controls if right-clicking the board in crazyhouse / bughouse will
     pop up a menu to drop a piece on the clicked square (old,
     deprecated behavior) or allow you to step through an engine PV
     (new, recommended behavior).

Enable Variation Trees
     If this option is on, playing a move in Edit Game or Analyze mode
     while keeping the Shift key pressed will start a new variation.
     You can then recall the previous line through the `Revert' menu
     item.  When off, playing a move will truncate the game and append
     the move irreversibly.

Hide Thinking
     If this option is off, the chess engine's notion of the score and
     best line of play from the current position is displayed as it is
     thinking. The score indicates how many pawns ahead (or if negative,
     behind) the chess engine thinks it is. In matches between two
     machines, the score is prefixed by `W' or `B' to indicate whether
     it is showing White's thinking or Black's, and only the thinking
     of the engine that is on move is shown.  The shifted `Ctrl-H' key
     is a keyboard equivalent.

Highlight Last Move
     If Highlight Last Move is on, after a move is made, the starting
     and ending squares remain highlighted. In addition, after you use
     Backward or Back to Start, the starting and ending squares of the
     last move to be unmade are highlighted.

Highlight with Arrow
     Causes the highlighting described in Highlight Last Move to be done
     by drawing an arrow between the highlighted squares, so that it is
     visible even when the width of the grid lines is set to zero.

Move Sound
     Enables the sounding of an audible signal when the computer
     performs a move.  For the selection of the sound, see `Sound
     Options'.  If you turn on this option when using XBoard with the
     Internet Chess Server, you will probably want to give the `set
     bell 0' command to the ICS, since otherwise the ICS will ring the
     terminal bell after every move (not just yours). (The `.icsrc' file
     is a good place for this; see *note ICS options::.)

One-Click Moving
     If this option is on, XBoard does not wait for you to click both
     the from- and the to-square, or drag the piece, but performs a
     move as soon as it is uniqely specified.  This applies to clicking
     an own piece that only has a single legal move, clicking an empty
     square or opponent piece where only one of your pieces can move
     (or capture) to.  Furthermore, a double-click on a piece that can
     only make a single capture will cause that capture to be made.
     Promoting a Pawn by clicking its to-square will suppress the
     promotion popup or other methods for selecting an under-promotion,
     and make it promote to Queen.

Periodic Updates
     If this option is off (or if you are using a chess engine that
     does not support periodic updates), the analysis window will only
     be updated when the analysis changes. If this option is on, the
     Analysis Window will be updated every two seconds.

Play Move(s) of Clicked PV
     If this option is on, right-clicking a PV in the Engine Output
     window during Analyze mode will cause the first move of that PV to
     be played.  You could also play more than one (or no) PV move by
     moving the mouse to engage in the PV walk such a right-click will
     start, to seek out another position along the PV where you want to
     continue the analysis, before releasing the mouse button.

Ponder Next Move
     If this option is off, the chess engine will think only when it is
     on move.  If the option is on, the engine will also think while
     waiting for you to make your move.  The shifted `Ctrl-P' key is a
     keyboard equivalent.

Popup Exit Message
     If this option is on, when XBoard wants to display a message just
     before exiting, it brings up a modal dialog box and waits for you
     to click OK before exiting.  If the option is off, XBoard prints
     the message to standard error (the terminal) and exits immediately.

Popup Move Errors
     If this option is off, when you make an error in moving (such as
     attempting an illegal move or moving the wrong color piece), the
     error message is displayed in the message area.  If the option is
     on, move errors are displayed in small pop-up windows like other
     errors.  You can dismiss an error pop-up either by clicking its OK
     button or by clicking anywhere on the board, including
     down-clicking to start a move.

Scores in Move List
     If this option is on, XBoard will display the depth and score of
     engine moves in the Move List, in the format of a PGN comment.

Show Coords
     If this option is on, XBoard displays algebraic coordinates along
     the board's left and bottom edges.

Show Target Squares
     If this option is on, all squares a piece that is 'picked up' with
     the mouse can legally move to are highighted with a fat colored
     dot in the highlightColor (non-captures) or premoveHighlightColor
     (captures).  Legality testing must be on for XBoard to know how
     the piece moves.

Test Legality
     If this option is on, XBoard tests whether the moves you try to
     make with the mouse are legal and refuses to let you make an
     illegal move.  The shifted `Ctrl-L' key is a keyboard equivalent.
     Moves loaded from a file with `Load Game' are also checked.  If
     the option is off, all moves are accepted, but if a local chess
     engine or the ICS is active, they will still reject illegal moves.
     Turning off this option is useful if you are playing a chess
     variant with rules that XBoard does not understand.  (Bughouse,
     suicide, and wild variants where the king may castle after
     starting on the d file are generally supported with Test Legality
     on.)

Flash Moves
Flash Rate
     If this option is non-zero, whenever a move is completed, the
     moved piece flashes the specified number of times.  The flash-rate
     setting determines how rapidly this flashing occurs.

Animation Speed
     Determines the duration (in msec) of an animation step, when
     `Animate Moving' is swiched on.

Zoom factor in Evaluation Graph
     Sets the valueof the `evalZoom' option, indicating the factor by
     which the score interval (-1,1) should be blown up on the vertical
     axis of the Evaluation Graph.

3.7.2 Time Control
------------------

Pops up a sub-menu where you can set the time-control parameters
interactively.  Allows you to select classical or incremental time
controls, set the moves per session, session duration, and time
increment.  Also allows specification of time-odds factors for one or
both engines.  If an engine is given a time-odds factor N, all time
quota it gets, be it at the beginning of a session or through the time
increment or fixed time per move, will be divided by N.  The shifted
`Alt+T' key is a keyboard equivalent.

3.7.3 Common Engine
-------------------

Pops up a sub-menu where you can set some engine parameters common to
most engines, such as hash-table size, tablebase cache size, maximum
number of processors that SMP engines can use, and where to find the
Polyglot adapter needed to run UCI engines under XBoard. The feature
that allows setting of these parameters on engines is new since XBoard
4.3.15, so not many XBoard/WinBoard engines respond to it yet, but UCI
engines should.

   It is also possible to specify a GUI opening book here, i.e. an
opening book that XBoard consults for any position a playing engine
gets in.  It then forces the engine to play the book move, rather than
to think up its own, if that position is found in the book.  The book
can switched on and off independently for either engine.  The way book
moves are chosen can be influenced through the settings of book depth
and variety.  After both sides have played more moves than the
specified depth, the book will no longer be consulted.  When the
variety is set to 50, moves will be played with the probability
specified in the book.  When set to 0, only the move(s) with the
highest probability will be played.  When set to 100, all listed moves
will be played with equal pobability.  Other settings interpolate
between that.  The shifted `Alt+U' key is a keyboard equivalent.

3.7.4 Adjudications
-------------------

Pops up a sub-menu where you can enable or disable various adjudications
that XBoard can perform in engine-engine games.  The shifted `Alt+J'
key is a keyboard equivalent.  You can instruct XBoard to detect and
terminate the game on checkmate or stalemate, even if the engines would
not do so, to verify engine result claims (forfeiting engines that make
false claims), rather than naively following the engine, to declare
draw on positions which can never be won for lack of mating material,
(e.g. KBK), or which are impossible to win unless the opponent seeks
its own demise (e.g. KBKN).  For these adjudications to work, `Test
Legality' should be switched on.  It is also possible to instruct
XBoard to enforce a 50-move or 3-fold-repeat rule and automatically
declare draw (after a user-adjustable number of moves or repeats) even
if the engines are prepared to go on.  It is also possible to have
XBoard declare draw on games that seem to drag on forever, or
adjudicate a loss if both engines agree (for 3 consecutive moves) that
one of them is behind more than a user-adjustable score threshold.  For
the latter adjudication to work, XBoard should be able to properly
understand the engine's scores. To facilitate the latter, you can
inform xboard here if the engines report scores from the viewpoint of
white, or from that of their own color.

3.7.5 ICS Options
-----------------

The following options occur in a dialog summoned by the ICS Options
menu item.
Auto Kibitz
     Setting this option when playing with or aginst a chess program on
     an ICS will cause the last line of thinking output of the engine
     before its move to be sent to the ICS in a kibitz command.  In
     addition, any kibitz message received through the ICS from an
     opponent chess program will be diverted to the engine-output
     window, (and suppressed in the console), where you can play
     through its PV by right-clicking it.

Auto Comment
     If this option is on, any remarks made on ICS while you are
     observing or playing a game are recorded as a comment on the
     current move.  This includes remarks made with the ICS commands
     `say', `tell', `whisper', and `kibitz'.  Limitation: remarks that
     you type yourself are not recognized; XBoard scans only the output
     from ICS, not the input you type to it.

Auto Observe
     If this option is on and you add a player to your `gnotify' list
     on ICS, XBoard will automatically observe all of that player's
     games, unless you are doing something else (such as observing or
     playing a game of your own) when one starts.  The games are
     displayed from the point of view of the player on your gnotify
     list; that is, his pawns move from the bottom of the window
     towards the top.  Exceptions:  If both players in a game are on
     your gnotify list, if your ICS `highlight' variable is set to 0,
     or if the ICS you are using does not properly support observing
     from Black's point of view, you will see the game from White's
     point of view.

Auto Raise Board
     If this option is on, whenever a new game begins, the chessboard
     window is deiconized (if necessary) and raised to the top of the
     stack of windows.

Auto Save
     If this option is true, at the end of every game XBoard prompts
     you for a file name and appends a record of the game to the file
     you specify.  Disabled if the `saveGameFile' command-line option
     is set, as in that case all games are saved to the specified file.
     *Note Load and Save options::.

Background Observe
     Setting this option will make XBoard suppress display of any boards
     from observed games while you are playing.  In stead the last such
     board will be remembered, and shown to you when you right-click
     the board.  This allows you to peek at your bughouse partner's
     game when you want, without disturbing your own game too much.

Dual Board
     Setting this option in combination with `Background Observe' will
     display boards of observed games while you are playing on a second
     board next to that of your own game.

Get Move List
     If this option is on, whenever XBoard receives the first board of
     a new ICS game (or a different game from the one it is currently
     displaying), it retrieves the list of past moves from the ICS.
     You can then review the moves with the `Forward' and `Backward'
     commands or save them with `Save Game'.  You might want to turn
     off this option if you are observing several blitz games at once,
     to keep from wasting time and network bandwidth fetching the move
     lists over and over.  When you turn this option on from the menu,
     XBoard immediately fetches the move list of the current game (if
     any).

Quiet Play
     If this option is on, XBoard will automatically issue an ICS `set
     shout 0' command whenever you start a game and a `set shout 1'
     command whenever you finish one.  Thus, you will not be distracted
     by shouts from other ICS users while playing.

Seek Graph
     Setting this option will cause XBoard to display an graph of
     currently active seek ads when you left-click the board while idle
     and logged on to an ICS.

Auto-Refresh Seek Graph
     In combination with the `Seek Graph' option this will cause
     automatic update of the seek graph while it is up.  This only
     works on FICS and ICC, and requires a lot of bandwidth on a busy
     server.

Premove
Premove White
Premove Black
First White Move
First Black Move
     If this option is on while playing a game on an ICS, you can
     register your next planned move before it is your turn.  Move the
     piece with the mouse in the ordinary way, and the starting and
     ending squares will be highlighted with a special color (red by
     default).  When it is your turn, if your registered move is legal,
     XBoard will send it to ICS immediately; if not, it will be ignored
     and you can make a different move.  If you change your mind about
     your premove, either make a different move, or double-click on any
     piece to cancel the move entirely.

     You can also enter premoves for the first white and black moves of
     the game.

ICS Alarm
ICS Alarm Time
     When this option is on, an alarm sound is played when your clock
     counts down to the icsAlarmTime in an ICS game.  (By default, the
     time is 5 seconds, but you can pecify other values with the Alarm
     Time spin control.)  For games with time controls that include an
     increment, the alarm will sound each time the clock counts down to
     the icsAlarmTime.  By default, the alarm sound is the terminal
     bell, but on some systems you can change it to a sound file using
     the soundIcsAlarm option; see below.

Colorize Messages
     Ticking this options causes various types of ICS messages do be
     displayed with different foreground or background colors in the
     console.  The colors can be individually selected for each type,
     through the accompanying text edits.

3.7.6 Match Options
-------------------

Summons a dialog where you can set options important for playing
automatic matches between two chess programs (e.g. by using the
`Machine Match' menu item in the `Mode' menu).
Tournament file
     To run a tournament, XBoard needs a file to record its progress,
     so it can resume the tourney when it is interrupted.  When you
     want to conduct anything more complex than a simple two-player
     match with the currently loaded engines, (i.e. when you select a
     list of participants), you must not leave this field blank.  When
     you enter the name of an existing tournament file, XBoard will
     ignore all other input specified in the dialog, and will take them
     from that tournament file.  This resumes an interrupted
     tournament, or adds another XBoard agent playing games for it to
     those that are already doing so.  Specifying a not-yet-existing
     file will cause XBoard to create it, according to the tournament
     parameters specified in the rest of the dialog, before it starts
     the tournament on ‘OK’.  Provided that you specify
     participants; without participants no tournament file will be
     made, but other entered values (e.g. for the file with opening
     positions) will take effect.  Default: configured by the
     `defaultTourneyName' option.

Sync after round
Sync after cycle
     The sync options, when on, will cause WinBoard to refrain from
     starting games of the next round or cycle before all games of the
     previous round or cycle are finished.  This guarantees correct
     ordering in the games file, even when multiple XBoard instances
     are concurrently playing games for the same tourney.  Default:
     sync after cycle, but not after round.

Select Engine
Tourney participants
     With the Select Engine drop-down list you can pick an engine from
     your list of installed engines in the settings file, to be added
     to the tournament.  The engines selected so far will be listed in
     the ‘Tourney participants’ memo.  The latter is a normal text
     edit, so you can use normal text-editing functions to delete
     engines you selected by accident, or change their order.  Do not
     type names yourself there, because names that do not exactly match
     one of the names from the drop-down list will lead to undefined
     behavior.

Tourney type
     Here you can specify the type of tournament you want.  XBoard’s
     intrinsic tournament manager support round-robins (type = 0),
     where each participant plays every other participant, and
     (multi-)gauntlets, where one (or a few) so-called ‘gauntlet
     engines’ play an independent set of opponents.  In the latter
     case, you specify the number of gauntlet engines.  E.g. if you
     specified 10 engines, and tourney type = 2, the first 2 engines
     each play the remaining 8.  A value of -1 instructs XBoard to play
     Swiss; for this to work an external pairing engine must be
     specified through the `pairingEngine' option.  Each Swiss round
     will be considered a tourney cycle in that case.  Default:0

Number of tourney cycles
Default number of Games
     You can specify tourneys where every two opponents play each other
     multiple times.  Such multiple games can be played in a row, as
     specified by the ‘number of games per pairing’, or by
     repeating the entire tournament schedule a number of times
     (specified by the ‘number of tourney cycles’).  The total
     number of times two engine meet will be the product of these two.
     Default is 1 cycle; the number of games per pairing is the same as
     the default number of match games, stored in your settings file
     through the `defaultMatchGames' option.

Save Tourney Games
     File where the tournament games are saved (duplicate of the item
     in the `Save Game Options').

Game File with Opening Lines
File with Start Positions
Game Number
Position Number
Rewind Index after
     These items optionally specify the file with move sequences or
     board positions the tourney games should start from.  The
     corresponding numbers specify the number of the game or position
     in the file.  Here a value -1 means automatic stepping through all
     games on the file, -2 automatic stepping every two games.  The
     Rewind-Index parameter causes a stepping index to reset to one
     after reaching a specified value.  A setting of -2 for the game
     number will also be effective in a tournament without specifying a
     game file, but playing from the GUI book instead.  In this case
     the first (odd) games will randomly select from the book, but the
     second (even) games will select the same moves from the book as
     the previous game.  (Note this leads to the same opening only if
     both engines use the GUI book!)  Default: No game or position file
     will be used. The default index if such a file is used is 1.

Disable own engine bools be default
     Setting this option reverses the default situation for use of the
     GUI opening book in tournaments from what it normally is, namely
     not using it.  So unless the engine is installed with an option to
     explicitly specify it should not use the GUI book (i.e.
     `-firstHasOwnBookUCI true'), it will be made to use the GUI book.

Replace Engine
Upgrade Engine
     With these two buttons you can alter the participants of an
     already running tournament.  After opening the Match Options
     dialog on an XBoard that is playing for the tourney, you will see
     all the tourney parameters in the dialog fields.  You can then
     replace the name of one engine by that of another by editing the
     `participants' field.  (But preserve the order of the others!)
     Pressing the button after that will cause the substitution.  With
     the `Upgrade Engine' button the substitution will only affect
     future games.  With `Replace Engine' all games the substituted
     engine has already played will be invalidated, and they will be
     replayed with the substitute engine.  In this latter case the
     engine must not be playing when you do this, but otherwise there
     is no need to pause the tournament play for making a substitution.

Clone Tourney
     Pressing this button after you have specified an existing
     tournament file will copy the contents of the latter to the dialog,
     and then puts the originally proposed name for the tourney file
     back.  You can then run a tourney with the same parameters
     (possibly after changing the proposed name of the tourney file for
     the new tourney) by pressing 'OK'.

3.7.7 Load Game Options
-----------------------

Summons a dialog where you can set the `autoDisplayComment' and
`autoDisplayTags' options, (which control popups when viewing loaded
games), and specify the rate at which loaded games are auto-played, in
seconds per move (which can be a fractional number, like 1.6).  You can
also set search criteria for determining which games will be displayed
in the Game List for a multi-game file, and thus be eligible for
loading:
Elo of strongest player
Elo of weakest player
year
     These numeric fields set thresholds (lower limits) on the Elo
     rating of the mentioned player, or the date the game was played.
     Defaults: 0

Search mode
     This setting determines which positions in a game will be
     considered a match to the position currently displayed in the
     board window when you press the `find position' button in the Game
     List.  You can search for an exact match, a position that has all
     shown material in the same place, but might contain additional
     material, a position that has all Pawns in the same place, but can
     have the shown material anywhere, a position that	can have all
     shown material anywhere, or a position that has material between
     certain limits anywhere.  For the latter you have to place the
     material that must be present in the four lowest ranks of the
     board, and optional additional material in the four highest ranks
     of the board.  You can request the optional material to be
     balanced.  The `narrow' button is similar in fuction to the `find
     position' button, but only searches in the already selected games,
     rather than the complete game file, and can thus be used to refine
     a search based on multiple criteria.

number of consecutive positions
     When you are searching by material, rather than for an exact match,
     this parameter indicates forhowmany consecutive game positions the
     same amount of material must be on the board before it is
     considered a match.

Also match reversed colors
Also match left-right flipped position
     When looking for matching positions rather than by material, these
     settings determine whether mirror images (in case of a vertical
     flip in combination with color reversal) will be also considered a
     match.  The left-right flipping is only useful after all castling
     rights have expired (or in Xiangqi).

3.7.8 Save Game Options
-----------------------

Summons a dialog where you can specify the files on which XBoard should
automatically save any played or entered games, (the `saveGameFile'
option), or the final position of such games (the `savePositionfile'
option).  You can also select 'auto-save' without a file name, in which
case XBoard will prompt the user for a file name after each game.  In
ICS mode you can limit the auto-saving to your own games (i.e. suppress
saving of observed games).  You can also set the default value for the
PGN Event tag that will be used for each new game you start.  Various
options for the format of the game can be specified as well, such as
whether scores and depths of engine games should be saved as comments,
and if a tag with info about the score with which the engine came out
of book should be included.  For Chess, always set the format to PGN,
rather than "old save stye"!

3.7.9 Game List
---------------

Pops up a dialog where you can select the PGN tags that should appear
on the lines in the game list, and their order.

3.7.10 Sound Options
--------------------

Summons a dialog where you can specify the sounds that should accompany
various events that can occur XBoard.  Most events are only relevant to
ICS play, but the move sound is an important exception.  For each event
listed in the dialog, you can select a standard sound from a menu.  You
can also select a user-supplied sound file, by typing its name into the
designated text-edit field first, and then selecting "Above WAV File"
from the menu for the event.  A dummy event has been provided for
trying out the sounds with the "play" button next to it.  The directory
with standard sounds, and the external program for playing the sounds
can be specified too, but normally you would not touch these once
XBoard is properly installed.  When a move sound other than 'None' is
selected, XBoard alerts you by playing that sound after each of your
opponent's moves (or after every move if you are observing a game on
the Internet Chess Server).  The sound is not played after moves you
make or moves read from a saved game file.

3.7.11 Save Settings Now
------------------------

Selecting this menu item causes the current XBoard settings to be
written to the settings file, so they will also apply in future
sessions.  Note that some settings are 'volatile', and are not saved,
because XBoard considers it too unlikely that you want those to apply
next time.  In particular this applies to the Chess program names, and
all options giving information on those Chess programs (such as their
directory, if they have their own opening book, if they are UCI or
native XBoard), or the variant you are playing.  Such options would
still be understood when they appear in the settings file in case they
were put there with the aid of a text editor, but they would disappear
from the file as soon as you save the settings.

   Note that XBoard no longer pays attention to options values specified
in the .Xresources file.  (Specifying key bindings there will still
work, though.)  To alter the default of volatile options, you can use
the following method: Rename your ~/.xboardrc settings file (to
~/.yboardrc, say), and create a new file ~/.xboardrc, which only
contains the options

     -settingsFile  ~/.yboardrc
     -saveSettingsFile  ~/.yboardrc

This will cause your settings to be saved on ~/.yboardrc in the future,
so that ~/.xboardrc is no longer overwritten.  You can then safely
specify volatile options in ~/.xboardrc, either before or after the
settingsFile options.  Note that when you specify persistent options
after the settingsFile options in ~/.xboardrc, you will essentially
turn them into volatile options with the specified value as default,
because that value will overrule the value loaded from the settings
file (being read later).

3.7.12 Save Settings on Exit
----------------------------

Setting this option has no immediate effect, but causes the settings to
be saved when you quit XBoard. What happens then is otherwise identical
to what happens when you use select "Save Settings Now", see there.

3.8 Help Menu
=============

Info XBoard
     Displays the XBoard documentation in info format.  For this
     feature to work, you must have the GNU info program installed on
     your system, and the file `xboard.info' must either be present in
     the current working directory, or have been installed by the `make
     install' command when you built XBoard.

Man XBoard
     Displays the XBoard documentation in man page format.  The `F1'
     key is a keyboard equivalent.  For this feature to work, the file
     `xboard.6' must have been installed by the `make install' command
     when you built XBoard, and the directory it was placed in must be
     on the search path for your system's `man' command.

About XBoard
     Shows the current XBoard version number.

3.9 Other Shortcut Keys
=======================

Show Last Move
     By hitting `Enter' the last move will be re-animated.

Load Next Game
     Loads the next game from the last game record file you loaded.
     The `Alt+PgDn' key triggers this action.

Load Previous Game
     Loads the previous game from the last game record file you loaded.
     The `Alt+PgUp' key triggers this action.  Not available if the
     last game was loaded from a pipe.

Reload Same Game
     Reloads the last game you loaded.  Not available if the last game
     was loaded from a pipe.  Currently no keystroke is assigned to
     this ReloadGameProc.

Reload Same Position
     Reloads the last position you loaded.  Not available if the last
     position was loaded from a pipe.  Currently no keystroke is
     assigned to this ReloadPositionProc.

   In the Xaw build of XBoard you can add or remove shortcut keys using
the X resources `paneA.translations'.  Here is an example of what could
go into your `.Xdefaults' file:

     XBoard*paneA.translations: \
       Shift<Key>?: MenuItem(Help.About) \n\
       Ctrl<Key>y: MenuItem(Action.Accept) \n\
       Ctrl<Key>n: MenuItem(Action.Decline) \n\
       Ctrl<Key>i: MenuItem(Nothing)
   So the key should always be bound to the action 'MenuItem', with the
(hierarchical) name of the menu item as argument.  There are a few
actions available for which no menu item exists: Binding a key to
`Nothing' makes it do nothing, thus removing it as a shortcut key.
Other such functions that can be bound to keys are:

     AboutGame, DebugProc (switches the -debug option on or off),
     LoadNextGame, LoadPrevGame, ReloadGame, ReloadPosition.

4 Options
*********

This section documents the command-line options to XBoard.  You can set
these options in two ways: by typing them on the shell command line you
use to start XBoard, or by editing the settings file (usually
~/.xboardrc) to alter the value of the setting that was saved there.
Some of the options cannot be changed while XBoard is running; others
set the initial state of items that can be changed with the *note
Options:: menu.

   Most of the options have both a long name and a short name. To turn a
boolean option on or off from the command line, either give its long
name followed by the value true or false (`-longOptionName true'), or
give just the short name to turn the option on (`-opt'), or the short
name preceded by `x' to turn the option off (`-xopt'). For options that
take strings or numbers as values, you can use the long or short option
names interchangeably.

4.1 Chess Engine Options
========================

-tc or -timeControl minutes[:seconds]
     Each player begins with his clock set to the `timeControl' period.
     Default: 5 minutes.  The additional options `movesPerSession' and
     `timeIncrement' are mutually exclusive.

-mps or -movesPerSession moves
     When both players have made `movesPerSession' moves, a new
     `timeControl' period is added to both clocks.  Default: 40 moves.

-inc or -timeIncrement seconds
     If this option is specified, `movesPerSession' is ignored.
     Instead, after each player's move, `timeIncrement' seconds are
     added to his clock.  Use `-inc 0' if you want to require the entire
     game to be played in one `timeControl' period, with no increment.
     Default: -1, which specifies `movesPerSession' mode.

-clock/-xclock or -clockMode true/false
     Determines whether or not to display the chess clocks. If
     clockMode is false, the clocks are not shown, but the side that is
     to play next is still highlighted. Also, unless `searchTime' is
     set, the chess engine still keeps track of the clock time and uses
     it to determine how fast to make its moves.

-st or -searchTime minutes[:seconds]
     Tells the chess engine to spend at most the given amount of time
     searching for each of its moves. Without this option, the chess
     engine chooses its search time based on the number of moves and
     amount of time remaining until the next time control.  Setting
     this option also sets clockMode to false.

-depth or -searchDepth number
     Tells the chess engine to look ahead at most the given number of
     moves when searching for a move to make. Without this option, the
     chess engine chooses its search depth based on the number of moves
     and amount of time remaining until the next time control.  With
     the option, the engine will cut off its search early if it reaches
     the specified depth.

-firstNPS number
-secondNPS number
     Tells the chess engine to use an internal time standard based on
     its node count, rather then wall-clock time, to make its timing
     decisions.  The time in virtual seconds should be obtained by
     dividing the node count through the given number, like the number
     was a rate in nodes per second.  Xboard will manage the clocks in
     accordance with this, relying on the number of nodes reported by
     the engine in its thinking output. If the given number equals zero,
     it can obviously not be used to convert nodes to seconds, and the
     time reported by the engine is used to decrement the XBoard clock
     in stead. The engine is supposed to report in CPU time it uses,
     rather than wall-clock time, in this mode. This option can provide
     fairer conditions for engine-engine matches on heavily loaded
     machines, or with very fast games (where the wall clock is too
     inaccurate).  `showThinking' must be on for this option to work.
     Default: -1 (off).  Not many engines might support this yet!

-firstTimeOdds factor
-secondTimeOdds factor
     Reduces the time given to the mentioned engine by the given factor.
     If pondering is off, the effect is indistinguishable from what
     would happen if the engine was running on an n-times slower
     machine. Default: 1.

-timeOddsMode mode
     This option determines how the case is handled where both engines
     have a time-odds handicap.  If mode=1, the engine that gets the
     most time will always get the nominal time, as specified by the
     time-control options, and its opponent's time is renormalized
     accordingly.  If mode=0, both play with reduced time. Default: 0.

-hideThinkingFromHuman true/false
     Controls the Hide Thinking option. *Note Options Menu::. Default:
     true.  (Replaces the Show-Thinking option of older xboard
     versions.)

-thinking/-xthinking or -showThinking true/false
     Forces the engine to send thinking output to xboard.  Used to be
     the only way to control if thinking output was displayed in older
     xboard versions, but as the thinking output in xboard 4.3 is also
     used for several other purposes (adjudication, storing in PGN
     file) the display of it is now controlled by the new option Hide
     Thinking. *Note Options Menu::. Default: false.  (But if xboard
     needs the thinking output for some purpose, it makes the engine
     send it despite the setting of this option.)

-ponder/-xponder or -ponderNextMove true/false
     Sets the Ponder Next Move menu option. *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-smpCores number
     Specifies the maximum number of CPUs an SMP engine is allowed to
     use.  Only works for engines that support the
     XBoard/WinBoard-protocol cores feature.

-mg or -matchGames n
     Automatically runs an n-game match between two chess engines, with
     alternating colors.  If the `loadGameFile' or `loadPositionFile'
     option is set, XBoard starts each game with the given opening
     moves or the given position; otherwise, the games start with the
     standard initial chess position.  If the `saveGameFile' option is
     set, a move record for the match is appended to the specified
     file. If the `savePositionFile' option is set, the final position
     reached in each game of the match is appended to the specified
     file. When the match is over, XBoard displays the match score and
     exits. Default: 0 (do not run a match).

-mm/-xmm or -matchMode true/false
     Setting `matchMode' to true is equivalent to setting `matchGames'
     to 1.

-sameColorGames n
     Automatically runs an n-game match between two chess engines,
     without alternating colors.  Otherwise the same applies as for the
     `-matchGames' option, over which it takes precedence if both are
     specified. (See there.)  Default: 0 (do not run a match).

-fcp or -firstChessProgram program
     Name of first chess engine.  Default: `Fairy-Max'.

-scp or -secondChessProgram program
     Name of second chess engine, if needed.  A second chess engine is
     started only in Two Machines (match) mode.  Default: `Fairy-Max'.

-fe or -firstEngine nickname
     This is an alternative to the `fcp' option for specifying the
     first engine, for engines that were already configured (using the
     `Load Engine' dialog) in XBoard's settings file.  It will not only
     retrieve the real name of the engine, but also all options
     configured with it.  (E.g. if it is UCI, whether it should use
     book.)

-se or -secondEngine nickname
     As `fe', but for the second engine.

-fb/-xfb or -firstPlaysBlack true/false
     In games between two chess engines, firstChessProgram normally
     plays white.  If this option is true, firstChessProgram plays
     black.  In a multi-game match, this option affects the colors only
     for the first game; they still alternate in subsequent games.

-fh or -firstHost host
-sh or -secondHost host
     Hosts on which the chess engines are to run. The default for each
     is `localhost'. If you specify another host, XBoard uses `rsh' to
     run the chess engine there. (You can substitute a different remote
     shell program for rsh using the `remoteShell' option described
     below.)

-fd or -firstDirectory dir
-sd or -secondDirectory dir
     Working directories in which the chess engines are to be run.  The
     default is "", which means to run the chess engine in the same
     working directory as XBoard itself.  (See the CHESSDIR environment
     variable.)  This option is effective only when the chess engine is
     being run on the local host; it does not work if the engine is run
     remotely using the -fh or -sh option.

-initString string or -firstInitString
-secondInitString string
     The string that is sent to initialize each chess engine for a new
     game.  Default:

          new
          random
     Setting this option from the command line is tricky, because you
     must type in real newline characters, including one at the very
     end.  In most shells you can do this by entering a `\' character
     followed by a newline.  Using the character sequence `\n' in the
     string should work too, though.

     If you change this option, don't remove the `new' command; it is
     required by all chess engines to start a new game.

     You can remove the `random' command if you like; including it
     causes GNU Chess 4 to randomize its move selection slightly so
     that it doesn't play the same moves in every game.  Even without
     `random', GNU Chess 4 randomizes its choice of moves from its
     opening book.  Many other chess engines ignore this command
     entirely and always (or never) randomize.

     You can also try adding other commands to the initString; see the
     documentation of the chess engine you are using for details.

-firstComputerString string
-secondComputerString string
     The string that is sent to the chess engine if its opponent is
     another computer chess engine.  The default is `computer\n'.
     Probably the only useful alternative is the empty string (`'),
     which keeps the engine from knowing that it is playing another
     computer.

-reuse/-xreuse or -reuseFirst true/false
-reuse2/-xreuse2 or -reuseSecond true/false
     If the option is false, XBoard kills off the chess engine after
     every game and starts it again for the next game.  If the option
     is true (the default), XBoard starts the chess engine only once
     and uses it repeatedly to play multiple games.  Some old chess
     engines may not work properly when reuse is turned on, but
     otherwise games will start faster if it is left on.

-firstProtocolVersion version-number
-secondProtocolVersion version-number
     This option specifies which version of the chess engine
     communication protocol to use.  By default, version-number is 2.
     In version 1, the "protover" command is not sent to the engine;
     since version 1 is a subset of version 2, nothing else changes.
     Other values for version-number are not supported.

-firstScoreAbs true/false
-secondScoreAbs true/false
     If this option is set, the score reported by the engine is taken
     to be that in favor of white, even when the engine plays black.
     Important when XBoard uses the score for adjudications, or in PGN
     reporting.

-niceEngines priority
     This option allows you to lower the priority of the engine
     processes, so that the generally insatiable hunger for CPU time of
     chess engines does not interfere so much with smooth operation of
     XBoard (or the rest of your system).  Negative values could
     increase the engine priority, which is not recommended.

-firstOptions string
-secondOptions string
     The given string is a comma-separated list of (option name=option
     value) pairs, like the following example: "style=Karpov,blunder
     rate=0".  If an option announced by the engine at startup through
     the feature commands of the XBoard/WinBoard protocol matches one
     of the option names (i.e. "style" or "blunder rate"), it would be
     set to the given value (i.e. "Karpov" or 0) through a
     corresponding option command to the engine.  This provided that
     the type of the value (text or numeric) matches as well.

-firstNeedsNoncompliantFEN string
-secondNeedsNoncompliantFEN string
     The castling rights and e.p. fields of the FEN sent to the
     mentioned engine with the setboard command will be replaced by the
     given string. This can for instance be used to run engines that do
     not understand Chess960 FENs in variant fischerandom, to make them
     at least understand the opening position, through setting the
     string to "KQkq -". (Note you also have to give the e.p. field!)
     Other possible applications are to provide work-arounds for
     engines that want to see castling and e.p. fields in variants that
     do not have castling or e.p.  (shatranj, courier, xiangqi, shogi)
     so that XBoard would normally omit them (string = "- -"), or to
     add variant-specific fields that are not yet supported by XBoard
     (e.g. to indicate the number of checks in 3check).

-shuffleOpenings
     Forces shuffling of the opening setup in variants that normally
     have a fixed initial position.  Shufflings are symmetric for black
     and white, and exempt King and Rooks in variants with normal
     castling.  Remains in force until a new variant is selected.

4.2 UCI + WB Engine Settings
============================

-fUCI or -firstIsUCI true/false
-sUCI or -secondIsUCI true/false
     Indicates if the mentioned engine executable file is an UCI engine,
     and should be run with the aid of the Polyglot adapter rather than
     directly.  Xboard will then pass the other UCI options and engine
     name to Polyglot on its command line, according to the option
     `adapterCommand'.

-fUCCI
-sUCCI
-fUSI
-sUSI
     Options similar to `fUCI' and `sUCI', except that they use the
     indicated engine with the protocol adapter specified in the
     `uxiAdapter' option.  This can then be configured for running an
     UCCI or USI adapter, as the need arises.

-adapterCommand string
     The string conatins the command that should be issued by XBoard to
     start an engine that is accompanied by the `fUCI' option.  Any
     identifier following a percent sign in the command (e.g. %fcp)
     will be considered the name of an XBoard option, and be replaced
     by the value of that option at the time the engine is started.
     For starting the second engine, any leading "f" or "first" in the
     option name will first be replaced by "s" or "second", before
     finding its value.  Default: 'polyglot -noini -ec "%fcp" -ed "%fd"'

-uxiAdapter string
     Similar to `adapterCommand', but used for engines accompanied by
     the `fUCCI' or `fUSI' option, so you can configure XBoard to be
     ready to handle more than one flavor of non-native protocols.
     Default: ""

-polyglotDir filename
     Gives the name of the directory in which the Polyglot adapter for
     UCI engines resides.  Default: "".

-usePolyglotBook true/false
     Specifies if the Polyglot book should be used as GUI book.

-polyglotBook filename
     Gives the filename of the opening book.  The book is only used
     when the `usePolyglotBook' option is set to true, and the option
     `firstHasOwnBookUCI' or `secondHasOwnBookUCI' applying to the
     engine is set to false.  The engine will be kept in force mode as
     long as the current position is in book, and XBoard will select
     the book moves for it. Default: "".

-fNoOwnBookUCI or -firstXBook or -firstHasOwnBookUCI true/false
-sNoOwnBookUCI or -secondXBook or -secondHasOwnBookUCI true/false
     Indicates if the mentioned engine has its own opening book it
     should play from, rather than using the external book through
     XBoard.  Default: depends on setting of the option
     `discourageOwnBooks'.

-discourageOwnBooks true/false
     When set, newly loaded engines will be assumed to use the GUI book,
     unless they explicitly specify differently.  Otherwise they will
     be assumed to not use the GUI book, unless the specify differently
     (e.g. with `firstXBook').  Default: false.

-bookDepth n
     Limits the use of the GUI book to the first n moves of each side.
     Default: 12.

-bookVariation n
     A value n from 0 to 100 tunes the choice of moves from the GUI
     books from totally random to best-only. Default: 50

-mcBookMode
     When this volatile option is specified, the probing algorithm of
     the GUI book is altered to always select the move that is most
     under-represented based on its performance.  When all moves are
     played in approximately the right proportion, a book miss will be
     reported, to give the engine opportunity to explore a new move.
     In addition score of the moves will be kept track of during the
     session in a book buffer.  By playing an match in this mode, a
     book will be built from scratch.  The only output are the saved
     games, which can be converted to an actual book later, with the
     `Save Games as Book' command.  This command can also be used to
     pre-fill the book buffer before adding new games based on the
     probing algorithm.

-fn string or -firstPgnName string
-sn string or -secondPgnName string
     Indicates the name that should be used for the engine in PGN tags
     of engine-engine games.  Intended to allow you to install verions
     of the same engine with different settings, and still distinguish
     them.  Default: "".

-defaultHashSize n
     Sets the size of the hash table to n MegaBytes. Together with the
     EGTB cache size this number is also used to calculate the memory
     setting of XBoard/WinBoard engines, for those that support the
     memory feature of the XBoard/WinBoard protocol. Default: 64.

-defaultCacheSizeEGTB n
     Sets the size of the EGTB cache to n MegaBytes. Together with the
     hash-table size this number is also used to calculate the memory
     setting of XBoard/WinBoard engines, for those that support the
     memory feature of the XBoard/WinBoard protocol. Default: 4.

-defaultPathEGTB filename
     Gives the name of the directory where the end-game tablebases are
     installed, for UCI engines.  Default: "/usr/local/share/egtb".

-egtFormats string
     Specifies which end-game tables are installed on the computer, and
     where.  The argument is a comma-separated list of format
     specifications, each specification consisting of a format name, a
     colon, and a directory path name, e.g.
     "nalimov:/usr/local/share/egtb".  If the name part matches that of
     a format that the engine requests through a feature command,
     xboard will relay the path name for this format to the engine
     through an egtpath command.  One egtpath command for each matching
     format will be sent.  Popular formats are "nalimov" DTM tablebases
     and "scorpio" bitbases.  Default: "".

-firstChessProgramNames={names}
     This option lets you customize the drop-down list of chess engine
     names that appears in the `Load Engine' and `Match Options' dialog.
     It consists of a list of strings, one per line.  When an engine is
     loaded, the corresponding line is prefixed with "-fcp ", and
     processed like it appeared on the command line.  That means that
     apart from the engine command, it can contain any list of XBoard
     options you want to use with this engine.  (Commonly used options
     here are -fd, -firstXBook, -fUCI, -variant.)

     The value of this option is gradually built as you load new engines
     through the `Load Engine' menu dialog, with `Add to list' ticked.
     To change it, edit your settings file with a plain text editor.

4.3 Tournament options
======================

-defaultMatchGames n
     Sets the number of games that will be used for a match between two
     engines started from the menu to n. Also used as games per pairing
     in other tournament formats.  Default: 10.

-matchPause n
     Specifies the duration of the pause between two games of a match
     or tournament between engines as n milliseconds.  Especially
     engines that do not support ping need this option, to prevent that
     the move they are thinking on when an opponent unexpectedly
     resigns will be counted for the next game, (leading to illegal
     moves there).  Default: 10000.

-tf filename or -tourneyFile filename
     Specifies the name of the tournament file used in match mode to
     conduct a multi-player tournament.  This file is a special
     settings file, which stores the description of the tournament
     (including progress info), through normal options (e.g. for time
     control, load and save files), and through some special-purpose
     options listed below.

-tt number or -tourneyType number
     Specifies the type of tourney: 0 = round-robin, N>0 =
     (multi-)gauntlet with N gauntlet engines, -1 = Swiss through
     external pairing engine.  Volatile option, but stored in tourney
     file.

-cy number or -tourneyCycles number
     Specifies the number of cycles in a tourney.  Volatile option, but
     stored in tourney file.

-participants list
     The list is a multi-line text string that specifies engines
     occurring in the `firstChesProgramNames' list in the settings file
     by their (implied or explicitly given) nicknames, one engine per
     line.  The mentioned engines will play in the tourney.  Volatile
     option, but stored in tourney file.

-results string
     The string of +=- characters lists the result of all played games
     in a toruney.  Games currently playing are listed as *, while a
     space indicates a game that is not yet played or playing .
     Volatile option, but stored in tourney file.

-defaultTourneyName string
     Specifies the name of the tournament file XBoard should propose
     when the `Match Options' dialog is opened.  Any %y, %M, %d, %h,
     %m, %s in the string are replaced by the current year, month, day
     of the month, hours, minutes, seconds of the current time,
     respectively, as two-digit number.  A %Y would be replaced by the
     year as 4-digit number. Default: empty string.

-pairingEngine filename
     Specifies the external program to be used to pair the participants
     in Swiss tourneys.  XBoard communicates with this engine in the
     same way as it communicates with Chess engines.  The only commands
     sent to the pairing engine are “results N string”, (where N is
     the number of participants, and string the results so far in the
     format of the results option), and “pairing N”, (where N is
     the number of the tourney game).  To the latter the pairing engine
     should answer with “A-B”, where A and B are participant
     numbers (in the range 1-N).  (There should be no reply to the
     results command.) Default: empty string.

-afterGame string
-afterTourney string
     When non-empty, the given string will be executed as a system
     command after each tournament game, orafterthe tourney completes,
     respectively.  This can be used, for example, to autmatically run
     a cross-table generator on the PGN file where games are saved, to
     update the tourney standings.  Default: ""

-syncAfterRound true/false
-syncAfterCycle true/false
     Controls whether different instances of XBoard concurrently
     running the same tournament will wait for each other.  Defaults:
     sync after cycle, but not after round.

-seedBase number
     Used to store the seed of the pseudo-random-number generator in the
     tourneyFile, so that separate instances of XBoard working on the
     same tourney can take coherent 'random' decisions, such as picking
     an opening for a given game number.

4.4 ICS options
===============

-ics/-xics or -internetChessServerMode true/false
     Connect with an Internet Chess Server to play chess against its
     other users, observe games they are playing, or review games that
     have recently finished. Default: false.

-icshost or -internetChessServerHost host
     The Internet host name or address of the chess server to connect
     to when in ICS mode. Default: `chessclub.com'.  Another popular
     chess server to try is `freechess.org'.  If your site doesn't have
     a working Internet name server, try specifying the host address in
     numeric form.  You may also need to specify the numeric address
     when using the icshelper option with timestamp or timeseal (see
     below).

-icsport or -internetChessServerPort port-number
     The port number to use when connecting to a chess server in ICS
     mode. Default: 5000.

-icshelper or -internetChessServerHelper prog-name
     An external helper program used to communicate with the chess
     server.  You would set it to "timestamp" for ICC (chessclub.com) or
     "timeseal" for FICS (freechess.org), after obtaining the correct
     version of timestamp or timeseal for your computer.  See "help
     timestamp" on ICC and "help timeseal" on FICS.  This option is
     shorthand for `-useTelnet -telnetProgram program'.

-telnet/-xtelnet or -useTelnet true/false
     This option is poorly named; it should be called useHelper.  If
     set to true, it instructs XBoard to run an external program to
     communicate with the Internet Chess Server.  The program to use is
     given by the telnetProgram option.  If the option is false (the
     default), XBoard opens a TCP socket and uses its own internal
     implementation of the telnet protocol to communicate with the ICS.
     *Note Firewalls::.

-telnetProgram prog-name
     This option is poorly named; it should be called helperProgram.
     It gives the name of the telnet program to be used with the
     `gateway' and `useTelnet' options.  The default is `telnet'. The
     telnet program is invoked with the value of
     `internetChessServerHost' as its first argument and the value of
     `internetChessServerPort' as its second argument.  *Note
     Firewalls::.

-gateway host-name
     If this option is set to a host name, XBoard communicates with the
     Internet Chess Server by using `rsh' to run the `telnetProgram' on
     the given host, instead of using its own internal implementation
     of the telnet protocol. You can substitute a different remote shell
     program for `rsh' using the `remoteShell' option described below.
     *Note Firewalls::.

-internetChessServerCommPort or -icscomm dev-name
     If this option is set, XBoard communicates with the ICS through
     the given character I/O device instead of opening a TCP connection.
     Use this option if your system does not have any kind of Internet
     connection itself (not even a SLIP or PPP connection), but you do
     have dial-up access (or a hardwired terminal line) to an Internet
     service provider from which you can telnet to the ICS.

     The support for this option in XBoard is minimal. You need to set
     all communication parameters and tty modes before you enter XBoard.

     Use a script something like this:

          stty raw -echo 9600 > /dev/tty00
          xboard -ics -icscomm /dev/tty00

     Here replace `/dev/tty00' with the name of the device that your
     modem is connected to. You might have to add several more options
     to these stty commands. See the man pages for `stty' and `tty' if
     you run into problems. Also, on many systems stty works on its
     standard input instead of standard output, so you have to use `<'
     instead of `>'.

     If you are using linux, try starting with the script below.
     Change it as necessary for your installation.

          #!/bin/sh -f
          # configure modem and fire up XBoard

          # configure modem
          (
            stty 2400 ; stty raw ; stty hupcl ; stty -clocal
            stty ignbrk ; stty ignpar ; stty ixon ; stty ixoff
            stty -iexten ; stty -echo
          ) < /dev/modem
          xboard -ics -icscomm /dev/modem
     After you start XBoard in this way, type whatever commands are
     necessary to dial out to your Internet provider and log in.  Then
     telnet to ICS, using a command like `telnet chessclub.com 5000'.
     Important: See the paragraph below about extra echoes, in *note
     Limitations::.

-icslogon or -internetChessServerLogonScript file-name
     Whenever XBoard connects to the Internet Chess Server, if it finds
     a file with the name given in this option, it feeds the file's
     contents to the ICS as commands. The default file name is `.icsrc'.
     Usually the first two lines of the file should be your ICS user
     name and password.  The file can be either in $CHESSDIR, in
     XBoard's working directory if CHESSDIR is not set, or in your home
     directory.

-msLoginDelay delay
     If you experience trouble logging on to an ICS when using the
     `-icslogon' option, inserting some delay between characters of the
     logon script may help. This option adds `delay' milliseconds of
     delay between characters. Good values to try are 100 and 250.

-icsinput/-xicsinput or -internetChessServerInputBox true/false
     Sets the ICS Input Box menu option. *Note Mode Menu::. Default:
     false.

-autocomm/-xautocomm or -autoComment true/false
     Sets the Auto Comment menu option. *Note Options Menu::. Default:
     false.

-autoflag/-xautoflag or -autoCallFlag true/false
     Sets the Auto Flag menu option.  *Note Options Menu::. Default:
     false.

-autobs/-xautobs or -autoObserve true/false
     Sets the Auto Observe menu option.  *Note Options Menu::. Default:
     false.

-autoKibitz
     Enables kibitzing of the engines last thinking output (depth,
     score, time, speed, PV) before it moved to the ICS, in zippy mode.
     The option `showThinking' must be switched on for this option to
     work.  Also diverts similar kibitz information of an opponent
     engine that is playing you through the ICS to the engine-output
     window, as if the engine was playing locally.

-seekGraph true/false or -sg
     Enables displaying of the seek graph by left-clicking the board
     when you are logged on to an ICS and currently idle.  The seek
     graph show all players currently seeking games on the ICS, plotted
     according to their rating and the time control of the game they
     seek, in three different colors (for rated, unrated and wild
     games).  Computer ads are displayed as squares, human ads are dots.
     Default: false.

-autoRefresh true/false
     Enables automatic updating of the seek graph, by having the ICS
     send a running update of all newly placed and removed seek ads.
     This consumes a substantial amount of communication bandwidth, and
     is only supported for FICS and ICC.  Default: false.

-backgroundObserve true/false
     When true, boards sent to you by the ICS from other games while
     you are playing (e.g. because you are observing them) will not be
     automatically displayed.  Only a summary of time left and material
     of both players will appear in the message field above the board.
     XBoard will remember the last board it has received this way, and
     will display it in stead of the position in your own game when you
     press the right mouse button.  No other information is stored on
     such games observed in the background; you cannot save such a game
     later, or step through its moves.  This feature is provided solely
     for the benefit of bughouse players, to enable them to peek at
     their partner's game without the need to logon twice.  Default:
     false.

-dualBoard true/false
     In combination with -backgroundObserve true, this option will
     display the board of the background game side by side with that of
     your own game, so you can have it in view permanently.  Any board
     or holdings info coming in will be displayed on the secondary
     board immediately.  This feature is still experimental and largely
     unfinished.  There is no animation or highlighting of moves on the
     secondary board.  Default: false.

-disguisePromotedPieces true/false
     When set promoted Pawns in crazyhouse/bughouse are displayed
     identical to primordial pieces of the same type, rather than
     distinguishable.  Default: true.

-moves/-xmoves or -getMoveList true/false
     Sets the Get Move List menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-alarm/-xalarm or -icsAlarm true/false
     Sets the ICS Alarm menu option.  *Note Options Menu::. Default:
     true.

-icsAlarmTime ms
     Sets the time in milliseconds for the ICS Alarm menu option.
     *Note Options Menu::. Default: 5000.

lowTimeWarning true/false
     Controls a color change of the board as a warning your time is
     running out.  *Note Options Menu::. Default: false.

-pre/-xpre \fRor\fB -premove true/false
     Sets the Premove menu option. *Note Options Menu::. Default: true.

-prewhite/-xprewhite or -premoveWhite
-preblack/-xpreblack or -premoveBlack
-premoveWhiteText string
-premoveBlackText string
     Set the menu options for specifying the first move for either
     color.  *Note Options Menu::. Defaults: false and empty strings,
     so no pre-moves.

-quiet/-xquiet or -quietPlay true/false
     Sets the Quiet Play menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.  Default:
     false.

-colorizeMessages or -colorize/-xcolorize
     Setting colorizeMessages to true tells XBoard to colorize the
     messages received from the ICS.  Colorization works only if your
     xterm supports ISO 6429 escape sequences for changing text colors.
     Default: true.

-colorShout foreground,background,bold
-colorSShout foreground,background,bold
-colorCShout foreground,background,bold
-colorChannel1 foreground,background,bold
-colorChannel foreground,background,bold
-colorKibitz foreground,background,bold
-colorTell foreground,background,bold
-colorChallege foreground,background,bold
-colorRequest foreground,background,bold
-colorSeek foreground,background,bold
-colorNormal foreground,background,bold
     These options set the colors used when colorizing ICS messages.
     All ICS messages are grouped into one of these categories: shout,
     sshout, channel 1, other channel, kibitz, tell, challenge, request
     (including abort, adjourn, draw, pause, and takeback), or normal
     (all other messages).

     Each foreground or background argument can be one of the following:
     black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta, cyan, white, or default.
     Here "default" means the default foreground or background color of
     your xterm.  Bold can be 1 or 0.  If background is omitted,
     "default" is assumed; if bold is omitted, 0 is assumed.

-soundProgram progname
     If this option is set to a sound-playing program that is installed
     and working on your system, XBoard can play sound files when
     certain events occur, listed below.  The default program name is
     "play".  If any of the sound options is set to "$", the event
     rings the terminal bell by sending a ^G character to standard
     output, instead of playing a sound file.  If an option is set to
     the empty string "", no sound is played for that event.

-soundDirectory directoryname
     This option specifies where XBoard will look for sound files, when
     these are not given as an absolute path name.

-soundShout filename
-soundSShout filename
-soundCShout filename
-soundChannel filename
-soundChannel1 filename
-soundKibitz filename
-soundTell filename
-soundChallenge filename
-soundRequest filename
-soundSeek filename
     These sounds are triggered in the same way as the colorization
     events described above.  They all default to "", no sound.  They
     are played only if the colorizeMessages is on.  CShout is
     synonymous with SShout.

-soundMove filename
     This sound is used by the Move Sound menu option.  Default: "$".

-soundIcsAlarm filename
     This sound is used by the ICS Alarm menu option.  Default: "$".

-soundIcsWin filename
     This sound is played when you win an ICS game.  Default: "" (no
     sound).

-soundIcsLoss filename
     This sound is played when you lose an ICS game.  Default: "" (no
     sound).

-soundIcsDraw filename
     This sound is played when you draw an ICS game.  Default: "" (no
     sound).

-soundIcsUnfinished filename
     This sound is played when an ICS game that you are participating
     in is aborted, adjourned, or otherwise ends inconclusively.
     Default: "" (no sound).

4.5 Load and Save options
=========================

-lgf or -loadGameFile file
-lgi or -loadGameIndex index
     If the `loadGameFile' option is set, XBoard loads the specified
     game file at startup. The file name `-' specifies the standard
     input. If there is more than one game in the file, XBoard pops up
     a menu of the available games, with entries based on their PGN
     (Portable Game Notation) tags.  If the `loadGameIndex' option is
     set to `N', the menu is suppressed and the N th game found in the
     file is loaded immediately.  The menu is also suppressed if
     `matchMode' is enabled or if the game file is a pipe; in these
     cases the first game in the file is loaded immediately.  Use the
     `pxboard' shell script provided with XBoard if you want to pipe in
     files containing multiple games and still see the menu.  If the
     loadGameIndex specifies an index -1, this triggers auto-increment
     of the index in `matchMode', which means that after every game the
     index is incremented by one, causing each game of the match to be
     played from the next game in the file. Similarly, specifying an
     index value of -2 causes the index to be incremented every two
     games, so that each game in the file is used twice (with reversed
     colors).  The `rewindIndex' option causes the index to be reset to
     the first game of the file when it has reached a specified value.

-rewindIndex n
     Causes a position file or game file to be rewound to its beginning
     after n positions or games in auto-increment `matchMode'.  See
     `loadPositionIndex' and `loadGameIndex'.  default: 0 (no rewind).

-td or -timeDelay seconds
     Time delay between moves during `Load Game' or `Analyze File'.
     Fractional seconds are allowed; try `-td 0.4'.  A time delay value
     of -1 tells XBoard not to step through game files automatically.
     Default: 1 second.

-sgf or -saveGameFile file
     If this option is set, XBoard appends a record of every game
     played to the specified file. The file name `-' specifies the
     standard output.

-autosave/-xautosave or -autoSaveGames true/false
     Sets the Auto Save menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.  Default:
     false.  Ignored if `saveGameFile' is set.

-onlyOwnGames true/false
     Suppresses auto-saving of ICS observed games. Default: false.

-lpf or -loadPositionFile file
-lpi or -loadPositionIndex index
     If the `loadPositionFile' option is set, XBoard loads the
     specified position file at startup. The file name `-' specifies the
     standard input. If the `loadPositionIndex' option is set to N, the
     Nth position found in the file is loaded; otherwise the first
     position is loaded.  If the loadPositionIndex specifies an index
     -1, this triggers auto-increment of the index in `matchMode',
     which means that after every game the index is incremented by one,
     causing each game of the match to be played from the next position
     in the file. Similarly, specifying an index value of -2 causes the
     index to be incremented every two games, so that each position in
     the file is used twice (with the engines playing opposite colors).
     The `rewindIndex' option causes the index to be reset to the first
     position of the file when it has reached a specified value.

-spf or -savePositionFile file
     If this option is set, XBoard appends the final position reached
     in every game played to the specified file. The file name `-'
     specifies the standard output.

-pgnExtendedInfo true/false
     If this option is set, XBoard saves depth, score and time used for
     each move that the engine found as a comment in the PGN file.
     Default: false.

-pgnEventHeader string
     Sets the name used in the PGN event tag to string.  Default:
     "Computer Chess Game".

-pgnNumberTag true/false
     Include the (unique) sequence number of a tournament game into the
     saved PGN file as a 'number' tag.  Default: false.

-saveOutOfBookInfo true/false
     Include the information on how the engine(s) game out of its
     opening book in a special 'annotator' tag with the PGN file.
     Default: true.

-oldsave/-xoldsave or -oldSaveStyle true/false
     Sets the Old Save Style menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: false.

-gameListTags string
     The character string lists the PGN tags that should be printed in
     the Game List, and their order. The meaning of the codes is
     e=event, s=site, d=date, o=round, p=players, r=result, w=white
     Elo, b=black Elo, t=time control, v=variant, a=out-of-book info,
     c=result comment.  Default: "eprd"

-ini or -settingsFile filename
-saveSettingsFile filename
@filename
     When XBoard encounters an option -settingsFile (or -ini for short),
     or @filename, it tries to read the mentioned file, and substitutes
     the contents of it (presumaby more command-line options) in place
     of the option.  In the case of -ini or -settingsFile, the name of
     a successfully read settings file is also remembered as the file
     to use for saving settings (automatically on exit, or on user
     command).  An option of the form @filename does not affect saving.
     The option -saveSettingsFile does specify a name of the file to use
     for saving, without reading any options from it, and is thus also
     effective when the file did not exist yet.  So the settings will
     be saved to the file specified in the last -saveSettingsFile or
     succesfull -settingsFile / -ini command, if any, and in
     /etc/xboard/xboard.conf otherwise.  Usualy the latter is only
     accessible for the system administrator, though, and will be used
     to contain system-wide default setings, amongst which a
     -saveSettingsFile and -settingsFile options to specify a settings
     file accessible to the individual user, such as ~/.xboardrc in the
     user's home directory.

-saveSettingsOnExit true/false
     Controls saving of options on the settings file.  *Note Options
     Menu::.  Default: true.

4.6 User interface options
==========================

-display
-geometry
-iconic
-name
     These and most other standard Xt options are accepted.

-noGUI
     Suppresses all GUI functions of XBoard (to speed up automated
     ultra-fast engine-engine games, which you don't want to watch).
     There will be no board or clock updates, no printing of moves, and
     no update of the icon on the task bar in this mode.

-logoSize N
     This option controls the drawing of player logos next to the
     clocks.  The integer N specifies the width of the logo in pixels;
     the logo height will always be half the width.  When N = 0, no
     logos will be diplayed.  Default: 0.

-firstLogo imagefile
-secondLogo imagefile
     Specify the images to be used as player logos when `logoSize' is
     non-zero, next to the white and black clocks, respectively.

-autoLogo true/false

-logoDir filename
     When `autoLogo' is set, XBoard will search for a PNG image file
     with the name of the engine or ICS in the directory specified by
     `logoDir'.

-recentEngines number
-recentEngineList list
     When the number is larger than zero, it determines how many
     recently used engines will be appended at the bottom of the
     `Engines' menu.  The engines will be saved in your settings file
     as the option `recentEngineList', by their nicknames, and the most
     recently used one will always be sorted to the top.  If the list
     after that is longer than the specified number, the last one is
     discarded.  Changes in the list will only become visible the next
     session, provided you saved the settings.  Default: 6.

-autoInstall list
     When the list is set to a non-empty string, XBoard will scan the
     operating system's plugin directory for engines supporting UCI and
     XBoard protocol at startup.  When it finds an engine that was
     installed after it last saved its settings, a line to launch that
     engine (as per specs in the plugin file) is appended to the
     -firstChessProgramNames list of installed engines.  In the future
     it will be possible to use the list to limit this automatic adding
     of engines to a certain types of variants.

-oneClickMove true/false
     When set, this option allows you to enter moves by only clicking
     the to- or from-square, when only a single legal move to or from
     that square is possible.  Double-clicking a piece (or clicking an
     already selected piece) will instruct that piece to make the only
     capture it can legally do.  Default: false.

-movesound/-xmovesound or -ringBellAfterMoves true/false
     Sets the Move Sound menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.  Default:
     false.  For compatibility with old XBoard versions, -bell/-xbell
     are also accepted as abbreviations for this option.

-exit/-xexit or -popupExitMessage true/false
     Sets the Popup Exit Message menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-popup/-xpopup or -popupMoveErrors true/false
     Sets the Popup Move Errors menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: false.

-queen/-xqueen or -alwaysPromoteToQueen true/false
     Sets the Always Queen menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: false.

-sweepPromotions true/false
     Sets the `Almost Always Promote to Queen' menu option.  *Note
     Options Menu::.  Default: false.

-legal/-xlegal or -testLegality true/false
     Sets the Test Legality menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-size or -boardSize (sizeName | n1,n2,n3,n4,n5,n6,n7)
     Determines how large the board will be, by selecting the pixel size
     of the pieces and setting a few related parameters.  The sizeName
     can be one of: Titanic, giving 129x129 pixel pieces, Colossal
     116x116, Giant 108x108, Huge 95x95, Big 87x87, Large 80x80, Bulky
     72x72, Medium 64x64, Moderate 58x58, Average 54x54, Middling
     49x49, Mediocre 45x45, Small 40x40, Slim 37x37, Petite 33x33,
     Dinky 29x29, Teeny 25x25, or Tiny 21x21.  Xboard installs with a
     set of scalable (svg) piece images, which it scales to any of the
     requested sizes.  The square size can further be continuously
     scaled by sizing the board window, but this only adapts the size
     of the pieces, and has no effect on the width of the grid lines or
     the font choice (both of which would depend on he selected
     boardSize).  The default depends on the size of your screen; it is
     approximately the largest size that will fit without clipping.

     You can select other sizes or vary other layout parameters by
     providing a list of comma-separated values (with no spaces) as the
     argument.  You do not need to provide all the values; for any you
     omit from the end of the list, defaults are taken from the nearest
     built-in size.  The value `n1' gives the piece size, `n2' the
     width of the black border between squares, `n3' the desired size
     for the clockFont, `n4' the desired size for the coordFont, `n5'
     the desired size for the messageFont, `n6' the smallLayout flag (0
     or 1), and `n7' the tinyLayout flag (0 or 1).  All dimensions are
     in pixels.  If the border between squares is eliminated (0 width),
     the various highlight options will not work, as there is nowhere
     to draw the highlight.  If smallLayout is 1 and `titleInWindow' is
     true, the window layout is rearranged to make more room for the
     title.  If tinyLayout is 1, the labels on the menu bar are
     abbreviated to one character each and the buttons in the button
     bar are made narrower.

-overrideLineGap n
     When n >= 0, this forces the width of the black border between
     squares to n pixels for any board size. Mostly used to suppress
     the grid entirely by setting n = 0, e.g. in xiangqi or just
     getting a prettier picture. When n < 0 this the size-dependent
     width of the grid lines is used. Default: -1.

-coords/-xcoords or -showCoords true/false
     Sets the Show Coords menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.  Default:
     false.  The `coordFont' option specifies what font to use.

-autoraise/-xautoraise or -autoRaiseBoard true/false
     Sets the Auto Raise Board menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-autoflip/-xautoflip or -autoFlipView true/false
     Sets the Auto Flip View menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-flip/-xflip or -flipView true/false
     If Auto Flip View is not set, or if you are observing but not
     participating in a game, then the positioning of the board at the
     start of each game depends on the flipView option.  If flipView is
     false (the default), the board is positioned so that the white
     pawns move from the bottom to the top; if true, the black pawns
     move from the bottom to the top.  In any case, the Flip menu
     option (see *note Options Menu::) can be used to flip the board
     after the game starts.

-title/-xtitle or -titleInWindow true/false
     If this option is true, XBoard displays player names (for ICS
     games) and game file names (for `Load Game') inside its main
     window. If the option is false (the default), this information is
     displayed only in the window banner. You probably won't want to
     set this option unless the information is not showing up in the
     banner, as happens with a few X window managers.

-buttons/-xbuttons or -showButtonBar True/False
     If this option is False, xboard omits the [<<] [<] [P] [>] [>>]
     button bar from the window, allowing the message line to be wider.
     You can still get the functions of these buttons using the menus
     or their keyboard shortcuts.  Default: true.

-evalZoom factor
     The score interval (-1,1) is blown up on the vertical axis of the
     Evaluation Graph by the given factor.  Default: 1

-evalThreshold n
     Score below n (centiPawn) are plotted as 0 in the Evaluation Graph.
     Default: 25

-mono/-xmono or -monoMode true/false
     Determines whether XBoard displays its pieces and squares with two
     colors (true) or four (false). You shouldn't have to specify
     `monoMode'; XBoard will determine if it is necessary.

-showTargetSquares true/false
     Determines whether XBoard can highlight the squares a piece has
     legal moves to, when you grab that piece with the mouse.  Default:
     false.

-flashCount count
-flashRate rate
-flash/-xflash
     These options enable flashing of pieces when they land on their
     destination square.  `flashCount' tells XBoard how many times to
     flash a piece after it lands on its destination square.
     `flashRate' controls the rate of flashing (flashes/sec).
     Abbreviations: `flash' sets flashCount to 3.  `xflash' sets
     flashCount to 0.  Defaults:  flashCount=0 (no flashing),
     flashRate=5.

-highlight/-xhighlight or -highlightLastMove true/false
     Sets the Highlight Last Move menu option. *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: false.

-highlightMoveWithArrow true/false
     Sets the Highlight with Arrow menu option. *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: false.

-blind/-xblind or -blindfold true/false
     Sets the Blindfold menu option.  *Note Options Menu::.  Default:
     false.

-periodic/-xperiodic or -periodicUpdates true/false
     Controls updating of current move andnode counts in analysis mode.
     Default: true.

-fSAN
-sSAN
     Causes the PV in thinking output of the mentioned engine to be
     converted to SAN before it is further processed.  Warning: this
     might lose engine output not understood by the parser, and uses a
     lot of CPU power.  Default: the PV is displayed exactly as the
     engine produced it.

-showEvalInMoveHistory true/false
     Controls whether the evaluation scores and search depth of engine
     moves are displayed with the move in the move-history window.
     Default: true.

-clockFont font
     The font used for the clocks. If the option value is a pattern
     that does not specify the font size, XBoard tries to choose an
     appropriate font for the board size being used.  Default Xaw:
     -*-helvetica-bold-r-normal-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*.  Default GTK: Sans
     Bold %d.

-coordFont font
     The font used for rank and file coordinate labels if `showCoords'
     is true. If the option value is a pattern that does not specify
     the font size, XBoard tries to choose an appropriate font for the
     board size being used.  Default Xaw:
     -*-helvetica-bold-r-normal-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*.  Default GTK: Sans
     Bold %d.

-messageFont font
     The font used for popup dialogs, menus, etc.  If the option value
     is a pattern that does not specify the font size, XBoard tries to
     choose an appropriate font for the board size being used.  Default
     Xaw: -*-helvetica-medium-r-normal-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*.  Default GTK:
     Sans Bold %d.  The font used in the Edit Tags dialog.  If the
     option value contains %d, XBoard will replace it by an appropriate
     font for the board size being used.  (Only used in GTK build.)
     Default: Sans Normal %d.  The font used in the Edit Comment dialog.
     If the option value contains %d, XBoard will replace it by an
     appropriate font for the board size being used.  (Only used in GTK
     build.)  Default: Sans Normal %d.  The font used to display ICS
     output in the ICS  Chat window.  As ICS output often contains
     tables aligned by spaces, a mono-space font is recommended here.
     If the option value contains %d, XBoard will replace it by an
     appropriate font for the board size being used.  (Only used in GTK
     build.)  Default: Monospace Normal %d.  The font used in Move
     History and Engine Output windows.  As these windows display
     mainly moves, one could use a figurine font here.  If the option
     value contains %d, XBoard will replace it by an appropriate font
     for the board size being used.  (Only used in GTK build.)
     Default: Sans Normal %d.  The font used in the listbox of the Game
     List window.  If the option value contains %d, XBoard will replace
     it by an appropriate font for the board size being used.  (Only
     used in GTK build.)  Default: Sans Bold %d.

-fontSizeTolerance tol
     In the font selection algorithm, a nonscalable font will be
     preferred over a scalable font if the nonscalable font's size
     differs by `tol' pixels or less from the desired size.  A value of
     -1 will force a scalable font to always be used if available; a
     value of 0 will use a nonscalable font only if it is exactly the
     right size; a large value (say 1000) will force a nonscalable font
     to always be used if available.  Default: 4.

-pid or -pieceImageDirectory dir
     This options control what piece images xboard uses.  XBoard will
     look in the specified directory for an image in png or svg format
     for every piece type, with names like BlackQueen.svg,
     WhiteKnight.svg etc.  When neither of these is found (or no valid
     directory is specified) XBoard will use the svg piece that was
     installed with it (from the source-tree directory `svg').  Both
     svg and png images will be scaled by XBoard to the required size,
     but the png pieces lose much in quality when scaled too much.

-whitePieceColor color
-blackPieceColor color
-lightSquareColor color
-darkSquareColor color
-highlightSquareColor color
-preoveHighlightColor color
-lowTimeWarningColor color
     Colors to use for the pieces, squares, and square highlights.
     Defaults:

          -whitePieceColor       #FFFFCC
          -blackPieceColor       #202020
          -lightSquareColor      #C8C365
          -darkSquareColor       #77A26D
          -highlightSquareColor  #FFFF00
          -premoveHighlightColor #FF0000
          -lowTimeWarningColor   #FF0000

     On a grayscale monitor you might prefer:

          -whitePieceColor       gray100
          -blackPieceColor       gray0
          -lightSquareColor      gray80
          -darkSquareColor       gray60
          -highlightSquareColor  gray100
          -premoveHighlightColor gray70
          -lowTimeWarningColor   gray70

     The PieceColor options only work properly if the image files
     defining the pieces were pure black & white (possibly anti-aliased
     to produce gray scales and semi-transparancy), like the pieces
     images that come with the install.  Their effect on colored pieces
     is undefined.  The SquareColor option only have an effect when no
     board textures are used.

-trueColors true/false
     When set, this option suppresses the effect  of the PieceColor
     options mentioned above.  This is recommended for images that are
     already colored.

-useBoardTexture true/false
-liteBackTextureFile filename
-darkBackTextureFile filename
     Indicate the png image files to be used for drawing the board
     squares, and if they should be used rather than using simple
     colors.  The algorithm for cutting squares out of a given bitmap
     is such that the picture is perfectly reproduced when a bitmap the
     size of the complete board is given.  If the filename ends in
     "-NxM.png", with integer N and M, it is assumed to contain a
     bitmap of a complete board of N files and M ranks, and XBoard will
     scale it to exactly match the current square size.  If N=M=0 it
     scales the entire bitmap to the size of the board, irrespective of
     the number of files and ranks of the latter.  Without any -NxM
     suffix textures are only blown up by an integer factor when they
     are smaller than the square size, or, when the name starts with
     "xq", too small to cover the complete Xiangqi board.  Default:
     false and ""

-drag/-xdrag or -animateDragging true/false
     Sets the Animate Dragging menu option. *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-animate/-xanimate or -animateMoving true/false
     Sets the Animate Moving menu option. *Note Options Menu::.
     Default: true.

-animateSpeed n
     Number of milliseconds delay between each animation frame when
     Animate Moves is on.

-autoDisplayComment true/false
-autoDisplayTags true/false
     If set to true, these options cause the window with the move
     comments, and the window with PGN tags, respectively, to pop up
     automatically when such tags or comments are encountered during
     the replaying a stored or loaded game.  Default: true.

-pasteSelection true/false
     If this option is set to true, the Paste Position and Paste Game
     options paste from the currently selected text.  If false, they
     paste from the clipboard.  Default: false.

-autoCopyPV true|false
     When this option is set, the position displayed on the board when
     you terminate a PV walk (initiated by a right-click on board or
     engine-output window) will be automatically put on the clipboard
     as FEN.  Default: false.

-dropMenu true|false
     This option allows you to emulate old behavior, where the right
     mouse button brings up the (now deprecated) drop menu rather than
     displaying the position at the end of the principal variation.
     Default: False.

-pieceMenu true|false
     This option allows you to emulate old behavior, where the right
     mouse button brings up the (now deprecated) piece menu in Edit
     Position mode.  From this menu you can select the piece to put on
     the square you clicked to bring up the menu, or select items such
     as `clear board'.  You can also `promote' or `demote' a clicked
     piece to convert it into an unorthodox piece that is not directly
     in the menu, or give the move to `black' or `white'.

-variations true|false
     When this option is on, you can start new variations in Edit Game
     or Analyze mode by holding the Shift key down while entering a
     move.  When it is off, the Shift key will be ignored.  Default:
     False.

-appendPV true|false
     When this option is on, right-clicking a PV in the Engine Output
     window will play the first move of that PV in Analyze mode, or as
     many moves as you walk through by moving the mouse.  Default:
     False.

-absoluteAnalysisScores true|false
     When true, scores on the Engine Output window during analysis will
     be printed from the white point-of-view, rather than the
     side-to-move point-of-view.  Default: False.

-scoreWhite true|false
     When true, scores will always be printed from the white
     point-of-view, rather than the side-to-move point-of-view.
     Default: False.

-memoHeaders true|false
     When true, column headers will be displayed in the Engine Output
     window for the depth, score, time and nodes data.  Right-clicking
     on these headers will hide or show the corresponding data.  (Not
     intended for dynamic use, as already printed data of the current
     search will not be affected!)  Defaul: False.

4.7 Adjudication Options
========================

-adjudicateLossThreshold n
     If the given value is non-zero, XBoard adjudicates the game as a
     loss if both engines agree for a duration of 6 consecutive ply
     that the score is below the given score threshold for that engine.
     Make sure the score is interpreted properly by XBoard, using
     `-firstScoreAbs' and `-secondScoreAbs' if needed.  Default: 0 (no
     adjudication)

-adjudicateDrawMoves n
     If the given value is non-zero, XBoard adjudicates the game as a
     draw if after the given number of moves it was not yet decided.
     Default: 0 (no adjudication)

-checkMates true/false
     If this option is set, XBoard detects all checkmates and
     stalemates, and ends the game as soon as they occur.
     Legality-testing must be switched on for this option to work.
     Default: true

-testClaims true/false
     If this option is set, XBoard verifies all result claims made by
     engines, and those who send false claims will forfeit the game
     because of it.  Legality-testing must be switched on for this
     option to work. Default: true

-materialDraws true/false
     If this option is set, XBoard adjudicates games as draws when
     there is no sufficient material left to inflict a checkmate.  This
     applies to KBKB with like bishops (any number, actually), and to
     KBK, KNK and KK.  Legality-testing must be switched on for this
     option to work. Default: true

-trivialDraws true/false
     If this option is set, XBoard adjudicates games as draws that
     cannot be usually won without opponent cooperation. This applies
     to KBKB with unlike bishops, and to KBKN, KNKN, KNNK, KRKR and
     KQKQ. The draw is called after 6 ply into these end-games, to
     allow quick mates that can occur in some exceptional positions to
     be found by the engines.  KQKQ does not really belong in this
     category, and might be taken out in the future.  (When
     bitbase-based adjudications are implemented.)  Legality-testing
     must be on for this option to work. Default: false

-ruleMoves n
     If the given value is non-zero, XBoard adjudicates the game as a
     draw after the given number of consecutive reversible moves.
     Engine draw claims are always accepted after 50 moves,
     irrespective of the given value of n.

-repeatsToDraw n
     If the given value is non-zero, xboard adjudicates the game as a
     draw if a position is repeated the given number of times. Engines
     draw claims are always accepted after 3 repeats, (on the 3rd
     occurrence, actually), irrespective of the value of n.  Beware
     that positions that have different castling or en-passant rights
     do not count as repeats, XBoard is fully e.p. and castling aware!

4.8 Other options
=================

-ncp/-xncp or -noChessProgram true/false
     If this option is true, XBoard acts as a passive chessboard; it
     does not start a chess engine at all. Turning on this option also
     turns off clockMode. Default: false.

-viewer
-viewerOptions string
     Presence of the volatile option `viewer' on the command line will
     cause the value of the persistent option `viewerOptions' as stored
     in the settings file to be appended to the command line.  The
     `view' option will be used by desktop associations with game or
     position file types, so that `viewerOptions' can be used to
     configure the exact mode XBoard will start in when it should act
     on such a file (e.g. in -ncp mode, or analyzing with your favorite
     engine). The options are also automatically appended when Board is
     invoked with a single argument not being an option name, which is
     then assumed to be the name of a `loadGameFile' or (when the name
     ends in .fen) a `loadPositionFile'.  Default: "-ncp
     -engineOutputUp false -saveSettingsOnExit false".

-tourneyOptions string
     When XBoard is invoked with a single argument that is a file with
     .trn extension, it will assume this argument to be the value of a
     `tourneyFile' option, and apped the value of the persistent option
     `tourneyOptions' as stored in the settings file to the command
     line.  Thus the value of `tourneyOptions' can be used to configure
     XBoard to automatically start running a tournament when it should
     act on such a file.  Default: "-ncp -mm -saveSettingsOnExit false".

-mode or -initialMode modename
     If this option is given, XBoard selects the given modename from
     the Mode menu after starting and (if applicable) processing the
     loadGameFile or loadPositionFile option. Default: "" (no
     selection).  Other supported values are MachineWhite,
     MachineBlack, TwoMachines, Analysis, AnalyzeFile, EditGame,
     EditPosition, and Training.

-variant varname
     Activates preliminary, partial support for playing chess variants
     against a local engine or editing variant games.  This flag is not
     needed in ICS mode.  Recognized variant names are:

          normal        Normal chess
          wildcastle    Shuffle chess, king can castle from d file
          nocastle      Shuffle chess, no castling allowed
          fischerandom  Fischer Random shuffle chess
          bughouse      Bughouse, ICC/FICS rules
          crazyhouse    Crazyhouse, ICC/FICS rules
          losers        Lose all pieces or get mated (ICC wild 17)
          suicide       Lose all pieces including king (FICS)
          giveaway      Try to have no legal moves (ICC wild 26)
          twokings      Weird ICC wild 9
          kriegspiel    Opponent's pieces are invisible
          atomic        Capturing piece explodes (ICC wild 27)
          3check        Win by giving check 3 times (ICC wild 25)
          shatranj      An ancient precursor of chess (ICC wild 28)
          xiangqi       Chinese Chess (on a 9x10 board)
          shogi         Japanese Chess (on a 9x9 board & piece drops)
          capablanca    Capablanca Chess (10x8 board, with Archbishop
                        and Chancellor pieces)
          gothic        similar, with a better initial position
          caparandom    An FRC-like version of Capablanca Chess (10x8)
          janus         A game with two Archbishops (10x8 board)
          courier       Medieval intermediate between shatranj and
                        modern Chess (on 12x8 board)
          falcon        Patented 10x8 variant with two Falcon pieces
          berolina      Pawns capture straight ahead, and move diagonal
          cylinder      Pieces wrap around the board edge
          knightmate    King moves as Knight, and vice versa
          super         Superchess (shuffle variant with 4 exo-pieces)
          makruk        Thai Chess (shatranj-like, P promotes on 6th rank)
          asean         ASEAN Chess (a modernized version of Makruk)
          spartan       Spartan Chess (black has unorthodox pieces)
          fairy         A catchall variant in which all piece types
                        known to XBoard can participate (8x8)
          unknown       Catchall for other unknown variants

     NOT ALL BOARDSIZES PROVIDE A COMPLETE SET OF BUILT-IN BITMAPS FOR
     ALL UN-ORTHODOX PIECES, though. Only in `boardSize' middling and
     bulky all 22 piece types are provided, while -boardSize petite has
     most of them. Archbishop, Chancellor and Amazon are supported in
     every size from petite to bulky. Kings or Amazons are substituted
     for missing bitmaps. You can still play variants needing
     un-orthodox pieces in other board sizes providing your own bitmaps
     through the `bitmapDirectory' or `pixmapDirectory' options.

     In the shuffle variants, XBoard now does shuffle the pieces,
     although you can still do it by hand using Edit Position.  Some
     variants are supported only in ICS mode, including bughouse, and
     kriegspiel.  The winning/drawing conditions in crazyhouse
     (off-board interposition on mate) are not fully understood, but
     losers, suicide, giveaway, atomic, and 3check should be OK.
     Berolina and cylinder chess can only be played with legality
     testing off.  In crazyhouse, XBoard now does keep track of
     off-board pieces.  In shatranj it does implement the baring rule
     when mate detection is switched on.

-boardHeight N
     Allows you to set a non-standard number of board ranks in any
     variant.  If the height is given as -1, the default height for the
     variant is used.  Default: -1

-boardWidth N
     Allows you to set a non-standard number of board files in any
     variant.  If the width is given as -1, the default width for the
     variant is used.  With a non-standard width, the initial position
     will always be an empty board, as the usual opening array will not
     fit.  Default: -1

-holdingsSize N
     Allows you to set a non-standard size for the holdings in any
     variant.  If the size is given as -1, the default holdings size
     for the variant is used.  The first N piece types will go into the
     holdings on capture, and you will be able to drop them on the
     board in stead of making a normal move. If size equals 0, there
     will be no holdings.  Default: -1

-defaultFrcPosition N
     Specifies the number of the opening position in shuffle games like
     Chess960.  A value of -1 means the position is randomly generated
     by XBoard at the beginning of every game.  Default: -1

-pieceToCharTable string
     The characters that are used to represent the piece types XBoard
     knows in FEN diagrams and SAN moves. The string argument has to
     have an even length (or it will be ignored), as white and black
     pieces have to be given separately (in that order). The last
     letter for each color will be the King.  The letters before that
     will be PNBRQ and then a whole host of fairy pieces in an order
     that has not fully crystallized yet (currently FEACWMOHIJGDVSLU,
     F=Ferz, Elephant, A=Archbishop, C=Chancellor, W=Wazir, M=Commoner,
     O=Cannon, H=Nightrider). You should list at least all pieces that
     occur in the variant you are playing. If you have less than 44
     characters in the string, the pieces not mentioned will get
     assigned a period, and you will not be able to distinguish them in
     FENs. You can also explicitly assign pieces a period, in which
     case they will not be counted in deciding which captured pieces
     can go into the holdings.  A tilde '~' as a piece name does mean
     this piece is used to represent a promoted Pawn in crazyhouse-like
     games, i.e. on capture it turns back onto a Pawn.  A '+' similarly
     indicates the piece is a shogi-style promoted piece, that should
     revert to its non-promoted version on capture (rather than to a
     Pawn).  Note that promoted pieces are represented by pieces 11
     further in the list.  You should not have to use this option
     often: each variant has its own default setting for the piece
     representation in FEN, which should be sufficient in normal use.
     Default: ""

-pieceNickNames string
     The characters in the string are interpreted the same way as in the
     `pieceToCharTable' option. But on input, piece-ID letters are
     first looked up in the nicknames, and only if not defined there,
     in the normal pieceToCharTable. This allows you to have two letters
     designate the same piece, (e.g. N as an alternative to H for Horse
     in Xiangqi), to make reading of non-compliant notations easier.
     Default: ""

-colorNickNames string
     The side-to-move field in a FEN will be first matched against the
     letters in the string (first character for white, second for
     black), before it is matched to the regular 'w' and 'b'.  This
     makes it easier to read non-compliant FENs, which, say, use 'r'
     for white.  Default: ""

-debug/-xdebug or -debugMode true/false
     Turns on debugging printout.

-debugFile filename or -nameOfDebugFile filename
     Sets the name of the file to which XBoard saves debug information
     (including all communication to and from the engines).  A `%d' in
     the given file name (e.g. game%d.debug) will be replaced by the
     unique sequence number of a tournament game, so that the debug
     output of each game will be written on a separate file.

-engineDebugOutput number
     Specifies how XBoard should handle unsolicited output from the
     engine, with respect to saving it in the debug file.  The output
     is further (hopefully) ignored.  If number=0, XBoard refrains from
     writing such spurious output to the debug file.  If number=1, all
     engine output is written faithfully to the debug file.  If
     number=2, any protocol-violating line is prefixed with a '#'
     character, as the engine itself should have done if it wanted to
     submit info for inclusion in the debug file.  This option is
     provided for the benefit of applications that use the debug file
     as a source of information, such as the broadcaster of live games
     TLCV / TLCS.  Such applications can be protected from spurious
     engine output that might otherwise confuse them.

-rsh or -remoteShell shell-name
     Name of the command used to run programs remotely. The default is
     `rsh' or `remsh', determined when XBoard is configured and
     compiled.

-ruser or -remoteUser user-name
     User name on the remote system when running programs with the
     `remoteShell'. The default is your local user name.

-userName username
     Name under which the Human player will be listed in the PGN file.
     Default is the login name on your local computer.

-delayBeforeQuit number
-delayAfterQuit number
     These options order pauses before and after sending the "quit"
     command to an engine that must be terminated.  The pause between
     quit and the previous command is specified in milliseconds.  The
     pause after quit is used to schedule a kill signal to be sent to
     the engine process after the number of specified seconds plus one.
     This signal is a different one as the terminiation signal
     described in the protocol specs which engines can suppress or
     ignore, and which is sent directly after the "quit" command.
     Setting `delayAfterQuit' to -1 will suppress sending of the kill
     signal.  Default: 0

-searchMode n
     The integer n encodes the mode for the `find position' function.
     Default: 1 (= Exact position match)

-eloThresholdBoth elo
-eloThresholdAny elo
     Defines a lower limit for the Elo rating, which has to be surpassed
     before a game will be considered when searching for a board
     position.  Default: 0

-dateThreshold year
     Only games not played before the given year will be considered when
     searching for a board position


5 Chess Servers
***************

An "Internet Chess Server", or "ICS", is a place on the Internet where
people can get together to play chess, watch other people's games, or
just chat.  You can use either `telnet' or a client program like XBoard
to connect to the server.  There are thousands of registered users on
the different ICS hosts, and it is not unusual to meet 200 on both
chessclub.com and freechess.org.

   Most people can just type `xboard -ics' to start XBoard as an ICS
client.  Invoking XBoard in this way connects you to the Internet Chess
Club (ICC), a commercial ICS.  You can log in there as a guest even if
you do not have a paid account.  To connect to the largest Free ICS
(FICS), use the command `xboard -ics -icshost freechess.org' instead,
or substitute a different host name to connect to your favorite ICS.
For a full description of command-line options that control the
connection to ICS and change the default values of ICS options, see
*note ICS options::.

   While you are running XBoard as an ICS client, you use the terminal
window that you started XBoard from as a place to type in commands and
read information that is not available on the chessboard.

   The first time you need to use the terminal is to enter your login
name and password, if you are a registered player. (You don't need to do
this manually; the `icsLogon' option can do it for you.  *note ICS
options::.)  If you are not registered, enter `g' as your name, and the
server will pick a unique guest name for you.

   Some useful ICS commands include
`help <topic>'
     to get help on the given <topic>. To get a list of possible topics
     type "help" without topic.  Try the help command before you ask
     other people on the server for help.

     For example `help register' tells you how to become a registered
     ICS player.

`who <flags>'
     to see a list of people who are logged on.  Administrators (people
     you should talk to if you have a problem) are marked with the
     character `*', an asterisk. The <flags> allow you to display only
     selected players: For example, `who of' shows a list of players
     who are interested in playing but do not have an opponent.

`games'
     to see what games are being played

`match <player> [<mins>] [<inc>]'
     to challenge another player to a game. Both opponents get <mins>
     minutes for the game, and <inc> seconds will be added after each
     move.  If another player challenges you, the server asks if you
     want to accept the challenge; use the `accept' or `decline'
     commands to answer.

`accept'
`decline'
     to accept or decline another player's offer.  The offer may be to
     start a new game, or to agree to a `draw', `adjourn' or `abort'
     the current game. *Note Action Menu::.

     If you have more than one pending offer (for example, if more than
     one player is challenging you, or if your opponent offers both a
     draw and to adjourn the game), you have to supply additional
     information, by typing something like `accept <player>', `accept
     draw', or `draw'.

`draw'
`adjourn'
`abort'
     asks your opponent to terminate a game by mutual agreement.
     Adjourned games can be continued later.  Your opponent can either
     `decline' your offer or accept it (by typing the same command or
     typing `accept').  In some cases these commands work immediately,
     without asking your opponent to agree.  For example, you can abort
     the game unilaterally if your opponent is out of time, and you can
     claim a draw by repetition or the 50-move rule if available simply
     by typing `draw'.

`finger <player>'
     to get information about the given <player>. (Default: yourself.)

`vars'
     to get a list of personal settings

`set <var> <value>'
     to modify these settings

`observe <player>'
     to observe an ongoing game of the given <player>.

`examine'
`oldmoves'
     to review a recently completed game

   Some special XBoard features are activated when you are in examine
mode on ICS.  See the descriptions of the menu commands `Forward',
`Backward', `Pause', `ICS Client', and `Stop Examining' on the *note
Edit Menu::, *note Mode Menu::, and *note Action Menu::.

6 Firewalls
***********

By default, XBoard communicates with an Internet Chess Server by
opening a TCP socket directly from the machine it is running on to the
ICS. If there is a firewall between your machine and the ICS, this
won't work. Here are some recipes for getting around common kinds of
firewalls using special options to XBoard.  Important: See the
paragraph in the below about extra echoes, in *note Limitations::.

   Suppose that you can't telnet directly to ICS, but you can telnet to
a firewall host, log in, and then telnet from there to ICS.  Let's say
the firewall is called `firewall.example.com'. Set command-line options
as follows:

     xboard -ics -icshost firewall.example.com -icsport 23
   Then when you run XBoard in ICS mode, you will be prompted to log in
to the firewall host. This works because port 23 is the standard telnet
login service. Do so, then telnet to ICS, using a command like `telnet
chessclub.com 5000', or whatever command the firewall provides for
telnetting to port 5000.

   If your firewall lets you telnet (or rlogin) to remote hosts but
doesn't let you telnet to port 5000, you may be able to connect to the
chess server on port 23 instead, which is the port the telnet program
uses by default.  Some chess servers support this (including
chessclub.com and freechess.org), while some do not.

   If your chess server does not allow connections on port 23 and your
firewall does not allow you to connect to other ports, you may be able
to connect by hopping through another host outside the firewall that
you have an account on.  For instance, suppose you have a shell account
at `foo.edu'. Follow the recipe above, but instead of typing `telnet
chessclub.com 5000' to the firewall, type `telnet foo.edu' (or `rlogin
foo.edu'), log in there, and then type `telnet chessclub.com 5000'.

   Suppose that you can't telnet directly to ICS, but you can use rsh
to run programs on a firewall host, and that host can telnet to ICS.
Let's say the firewall is called `rsh.example.com'. Set command-line
options as follows:

     xboard -ics -gateway rsh.example.com -icshost chessclub.com

Then when you run XBoard in ICS mode, it will connect to the ICS by
using `rsh' to run the command `telnet chessclub.com 5000' on host
`rsh.example.com'.

   Suppose that you can telnet anywhere you want, but you have to run a
special program called `ptelnet' to do so.

   First, we'll consider the easy case, in which `ptelnet chessclub.com
5000' gets you to the chess server.  In this case set command line
options as follows:

     xboard -ics -telnet -telnetProgram ptelnet

Then when you run XBoard in ICS mode, it will issue the command
`ptelnet chessclub.com 5000' to connect to the ICS.

   Next, suppose that `ptelnet chessclub.com 5000' doesn't work; that
is, your `ptelnet' program doesn't let you connect to alternative
ports. As noted above, your chess server may allow you to connect on
port 23 instead.  In that case, just add the option `-icsport ""' to
the above command.  But if your chess server doesn't let you connect on
port 23, you will have to find some other host outside the firewall and
hop through it. For instance, suppose you have a shell account at
`foo.edu'. Set command line options as follows:

     xboard -ics -telnet -telnetProgram ptelnet -icshost foo.edu -icsport ""

Then when you run XBoard in ICS mode, it will issue the command
`ptelnet foo.edu' to connect to your account at `foo.edu'. Log in
there, then type `telnet chessclub.com 5000'.

   ICC timestamp and FICS timeseal do not work through some firewalls.
You can use them only if your firewall gives a clean TCP connection
with a full 8-bit wide path.  If your firewall allows you to get out
only by running a special telnet program, you can't use timestamp or
timeseal across it.  But if you have access to a computer just outside
your firewall, and you have much lower netlag when talking to that
computer than to the ICS, it might be worthwhile running timestamp
there.  Follow the instructions above for hopping through a host
outside the firewall (foo.edu in the example), but run timestamp or
timeseal on that host instead of telnet.

   Suppose that you have a SOCKS firewall that will give you a clean
8-bit wide TCP connection to the chess server, but only after you
authenticate yourself via the SOCKS protocol.  In that case, you could
make a socksified version of XBoard and run that.  If you are using
timestamp or timeseal, you will to socksify it, not XBoard; this may be
difficult seeing that ICC and FICS do not provide source code for these
programs.  Socksification is beyond the scope of this document, but see
the SOCKS Web site at http://www.socks.permeo.com/.  If you are missing
SOCKS, try http://www.funbureau.com/.

7 Environment variables
***********************

Game and position files are found in a directory named by the
`CHESSDIR' environment variable. If this variable is not set, the
current working directory is used. If `CHESSDIR' is set, XBoard
actually changes its working directory to `$CHESSDIR', so any files
written by the chess engine will be placed there too.

8 Limitations and known bugs
****************************

There is no way for two people running copies of XBoard to play each
other without going through an Internet Chess Server.

   Under some circumstances, your ICS password may be echoed when you
log on.

   If you are connecting to the ICS by running telnet on an Internet
provider or firewall host, you may find that each line you type is
echoed back an extra time after you hit <Enter>. If your Internet
provider is a Unix system, you can probably turn its echo off by typing
`stty -echo' after you log in, and/or typing <^E><Enter> (Ctrl+E
followed by the Enter key) to the telnet program after you have logged
into ICS.  It is a good idea to do this if you can, because the extra
echo can occasionally confuse XBoard's parsing routines.

   The game parser recognizes only algebraic notation.

   Many of the following points used to be limitations in XBoard 4.2.7
and earlier, but are now fixed: The internal move legality tester in
XBoard 4.3.xx does look at the game history, and is fully aware of
castling or en-passant-capture rights. It permits castling with the
king on the d file because this is possible in some "wild 1" games on
ICS.  The piece-drop menu does not check piece drops in bughouse to see
if you actually hold the piece you are trying to drop. But this way of
dropping pieces should be considered an obsolete feature, now that
pieces can be dropped by dragging them from the holdings to the board.
Anyway, if you would attempt an illegal move when using a chess engine
or the ICS, XBoard will accept the error message that comes back, undo
the move, and let you try another.  FEN positions saved by XBoard do
include correct information about whether castling or en passant are
legal, and also handle the 50-move counter.  The mate detector does not
understand that non-contact mate is not really mate in bughouse.  The
only problem this causes while playing is minor: a "#" (mate indicator)
character will show up after a non-contact mating move in the move
list. XBoard will not assume the game is over at that point, not even
when the option Detect Mates is on.  Edit Game mode always uses the
rules of the selected variant, which can be a variant that uses piece
drops.  You can load and edit games that contain piece drops.  The
(obsolete) piece menus are not active, but you can perform piece drops
by dragging pieces from the holdings.  Fischer Random castling is fully
understood.  You can enter castlings by dragging the King on top of
your Rook.  You can probably also play Fischer Random successfully on
ICS by typing castling moves into the ICS Interaction window.

   The menus may not work if your keyboard is in Caps Lock or Num Lock
mode.  This seems to be a problem with the Athena menu widget, not an
XBoard bug.

   Also see the ToDo file included with the distribution for many other
possible bugs, limitations, and ideas for improvement that have been
suggested.

9 Reporting problems
********************

You can report bugs and problems with XBoard using the bug tracker at
`https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/xboard/' or by sending mail to
`<bug-xboard@gnu.org>'.  It can also be useful to report or discuss
bugs in the WinBoard Forum at `http://www.open-aurec.com/wbforum/',
WinBoard development section.

   Please use the `script' program to start a typescript, run XBoard
with the `-debug' option, and include the typescript output in your
message.  Also tell us what kind of machine and what operating system
version you are using.  The command `uname -a' will often tell you this.

   If you improve XBoard, please send a message about your changes, and
we will get in touch with you about merging them in to the main line of
development.

10 Authors and contributors
***************************

Chris Sears and Dan Sears wrote the original XBoard.  They were
responsible for versions 1.0 through 1.2.  The color scheme was taken
from Wayne Christopher's `XChess' program.

   Tim Mann was primarily responsible for XBoard versions 1.3 through
4.2.7, and for WinBoard (a port of XBoard to Microsoft Win32) from its
inception through version 4.2.7.

   John Chanak contributed the initial implementation of ICS mode.  Evan
Welsh wrote `CMail', and Patrick Surry helped in designing, testing,
and documenting it.  Elmar Bartel contributed the new piece bitmaps
introduced in version 3.2.  Jochen Wiedmann converted the documentation
to texinfo.  Frank McIngvale added click/click moving, the Analysis
modes, piece flashing, ZIICS import, and ICS text colorization to
XBoard.  Hugh Fisher added animated piece movement to XBoard, and
Henrik Gram added it to WinBoard.  Mark Williams contributed the
initial (WinBoard-only) implementation of many new features added to
both XBoard and WinBoard in version 4.1.0, including copy/paste,
premove, icsAlarm, autoFlipView, training mode, auto raise, and
blindfold.  Ben Nye contributed X copy/paste code for XBoard.

   In a fork from version 4.2.7, Alessandro Scotti added many elements
to the user interface of WinBoard, including the board textures and
font-based rendering, the evaluation-graph, move-history and
engine-output window.  He was also responsible for adding the UCI
support.

   H. G. Muller continued this fork of the project, producing version
4.3.  He made WinBoard castling- and e.p.-aware, added variant support
with adjustable board sizes, the crazyhouse holdings, and the fairy
pieces.  In addition he added most of the adjudication options, made
WinBoard more robust in dealing with buggy and crashing engines, and
extended time control with a time-odds and node-count-based modes.
Most of the options that initially were WinBoard only have now been
back-ported to XBoard.

   Michel van den Bergh provided the code for reading Polyglot opening
books.

   Meanwhile, some work continued on the GNU XBoard project maintained
at savannah.gnu.org, but version 4.2.8 was never released.  Daniel
Mehrmann was responsible for much of this work.

   Most recently, Arun Persaud worked with H. G. Muller to merge all
the features of the never-released XBoard/WinBoard 4.2.8 of the GNU
XBoard project and the never-released 4.3.16 from H. G.'s fork into a
unified XBoard/WinBoard 4.4, which is now available both from the
savannah.gnu.org web site and the WinBoard forum.

11 CMail
********

The `cmail' program can help you play chess by email with opponents of
your choice using XBoard as an interface.

   You will usually run `cmail' without giving any options.

11.1 CMail options
==================

-h
     Displays `cmail' usage information.

-c
     Shows the conditions of the GNU General Public License.  *Note
     Copying::.

-w
     Shows the warranty notice of the GNU General Public License.
     *Note Copying::.

-v
-xv
     Provides or inhibits verbose output from `cmail' and XBoard,
     useful for debugging. The `-xv' form also inhibits the cmail
     introduction message.

-mail
-xmail
     Invokes or inhibits the sending of a mail message containing the
     move.

-xboard
-xxboard
     Invokes or inhibits the running of XBoard on the game file.

-reuse
-xreuse
     Invokes or inhibits the reuse of an existing XBoard to display the
     current game.

-remail
     Resends the last mail message for that game. This inhibits running
     XBoard.

-game <name>
     The name of the game to be processed.

-wgames <number>
-bgames <number>
-games <number>
     Number of games to start as White, as Black or in total. Default
     is 1 as white and none as black. If only one color is specified
     then none of the other color is assumed. If no color is specified
     then equal numbers of White and Black games are started, with the
     extra game being as White if an odd number of total games is
     specified.

-me <short name>
-opp <short name>
     A one-word alias for yourself or your opponent.

-wname <full name>
-bname <full name>
-myname <full name>
-oppname <full name>
     The full name of White, Black, yourself or your opponent.

-wna <net address>
-bna <net address>
-na <net address>
-oppna <net address>
     The email address of White, Black, yourself or your opponent.

-dir <directory>
     The directory in which `cmail' keeps its files. This defaults to
     the environment variable `$CMAIL_DIR' or failing that, `$CHESSDIR',
     `$HOME/Chess' or `~/Chess'. It will be created if it does not
     exist.

-arcdir <directory>
     The directory in which `cmail' archives completed games. Defaults
     to the environment variable `$CMAIL_ARCDIR' or, in its absence,
     the same directory as cmail keeps its working files (above).

-mailprog <mail program>
     The program used by cmail to send email messages. This defaults to
     the environment variable `$CMAIL_MAILPROG' or failing that
     `/usr/ucb/Mail', `/usr/ucb/mail' or `Mail'. You will need to set
     this variable if none of the above paths fit your system.

-logFile <file>
     A file in which to dump verbose debugging messages that are
     invoked with the `-v' option.

-event <event>
     The PGN Event tag (default `Email correspondence game').

-site <site>
     The PGN Site tag (default `NET').

-round <round>
     The PGN Round tag (default `-', not applicable).

-mode <mode>
     The PGN Mode tag (default `EM', Electronic Mail).

Other options
     Any option flags not listed above are passed through to XBoard.
     Invoking XBoard through CMail changes the default values of two
     XBoard options: The default value for `-noChessProgram' is changed
     to true; that is, by default no chess engine is started.  The
     default value for `-timeDelay' is changed to 0; that is, by default
     XBoard immediately goes to the end of the game as played so far,
     rather than stepping through the moves one by one.  You can still
     set these options to whatever values you prefer by supplying them
     on CMail's command line.  *Note Options::.

11.2 Starting a CMail Game
==========================

Type `cmail' from a shell to start a game as white. After an opening
message, you will be prompted for a game name, which is optional--if you
simply press <Enter>, the game name will take the form
`you-VS-opponent'. You will next be prompted for the short name of your
opponent. If you haven't played this person before, you will also be
prompted for his/her email address. `cmail' will then invoke XBoard in
the background. Make your first move and select `Mail Move' from the
`File' menu. *Note File Menu::. If all is well, `cmail' will mail a
copy of the move to your opponent. If you select `Exit' without having
selected `Mail Move' then no move will be made.

11.3 Answering a Move
=====================

When you receive a message from an opponent containing a move in one of
your games, simply pipe the message through `cmail'. In some mailers
this is as simple as typing `| cmail' when viewing the message, while in
others you may have to save the message to a file and do `cmail < file'
at the command line. In either case `cmail' will display the game using
XBoard. If you didn't exit XBoard when you made your first move then
`cmail' will do its best to use the existing XBoard instead of starting
a new one. As before, simply make a move and select `Mail Move' from
the `File' menu. *Note File Menu::. `cmail' will try to use the XBoard
that was most recently used to display the current game. This means
that many games can be in progress simultaneously, each with its own
active XBoard.

   If you want to look at the history or explore a variation, go ahead,
but you must return to the current position before XBoard will allow you
to mail a move. If you edit the game's history you must select `Reload
Same Game' from the `File' menu to get back to the original position,
then make the move you want and select `Mail Move'.  As before, if you
decide you aren't ready to make a move just yet you can either select
`Exit' without sending a move or just leave XBoard running until you
are ready.

11.4 Multi-Game Messages
========================

It is possible to have a `cmail' message carry more than one game.
This feature was implemented to handle IECG (International Email Chess
Group) matches, where a match consists of one game as white and one as
black, with moves transmitted simultaneously. In case there are more
general uses, `cmail' itself places no limit on the number of
black/white games contained in a message; however, XBoard does.

11.5 Completing a Game
======================

Because XBoard can detect checkmate and stalemate, `cmail' handles game
termination sensibly. As well as resignation, the `Action' menu allows
draws to be offered and accepted for `cmail' games.

   For multi-game messages, only unfinished and just-finished games
will be included in email messages. When all the games are finished,
they are archived in the user's archive directory, and similarly in the
opponent's when he or she pipes the final message through `cmail'. The
archive file name includes the date the game was started.

11.6 Known CMail Problems
=========================

It's possible that a strange conjunction of conditions may occasionally
mean that `cmail' has trouble reactivating an existing XBoard. If this
should happen, simply trying it again should work.  If not, remove the
file that stores the XBoard's PID (`game.pid') or use the `-xreuse'
option to force `cmail' to start a new XBoard.

   Versions of `cmail' after 2.16 no longer understand the old file
format that XBoard used to use and so cannot be used to correspond with
anyone using an older version.

   Versions of `cmail' older than 2.11 do not handle multi-game
messages, so multi-game correspondence is not possible with opponents
using an older version.

12 Other programs you can use with XBoard
*****************************************

Here are some other programs you can use with XBoard

12.1 GNU Chess
==============

The GNU Chess engine is available from:

   ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gnuchess/

   You can use XBoard to play a game against GNU Chess, or to interface
GNU Chess to an ICS.

12.2 Fairy-Max
==============

Fairy-Max is a derivative from the once World's smallest Chess program
micro-Max, which measures only about 100 lines of source code.  The
main difference with micro-Max is that Fairy-Max loads its
move-generator tables from a file, so that the rules for piece movement
can be easily configured to implement unorthodox pieces.  Fairy-Max can
therefore play a large number of variants, normal Chess being one of
those.  In addition it plays Knightmate, Capablanca and Gothic Chess,
Shatranj, Courier Chess, Cylinder chess, Berolina Chess, while the user
can easily define new variants.  It can be obtained from:

   http://home.hccnet.nl/h.g.muller/dwnldpage.html

12.3 HoiChess
=============

HoiChess is a not-so-very-strong Chess engine, which comes with a
derivative HoiXiangqi, able to play Chinese Chess. It can be obtained
from the standard Linux repositories through:

   sudo apt-get install hoichess

12.4 Crafty
===========

Crafty is a chess engine written by Bob Hyatt.  You can use XBoard to
play a game against Crafty, hook Crafty up to an ICS, or use Crafty to
interactively analyze games and positions for you.

   Crafty is a strong, rapidly evolving chess program. This rapid pace
of development is good, because it means Crafty is always getting
better.  This can sometimes cause problems with backwards
compatibility, but usually the latest version of Crafty will work well
with the latest version of XBoard.  Crafty can be obtained from its
author's FTP site: ftp://ftp.cis.uab.edu/hyatt/.

   To use Crafty with XBoard, give the -fcp and -fd options as follows,
where <crafty's directory> is the directory in which you installed
Crafty and placed its book and other support files.

Copyright
*********

Copyright (C) 1991 Digital Equipment Corporation, Maynard,
Massachusetts.

   All Rights Reserved.

   Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of Digital not be used in
advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software
without specific, written prior permission.

   Digital disclaims all warranties with regard to this software,
including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness.  In no
event shall Digital be liable for any special, indirect or
consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of
use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or
other tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or
performance of this software.

   Enhancements copyright (C) 1992-2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008,
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Published by the Free Software Foundation
59 Temple Place - Suite 330
Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA

   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
that the section entitled "GNU General Public License," is included
exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire resulting
derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission notice
identical to this one.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that the section entitled "GNU General Public License,"
and this permission notice, may be included in translations approved by
the Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.

GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
**************************

                        Version 3, 29 June 2007

     Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. `http://fsf.org/'

     Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
     license document, but changing it is not allowed.

Preamble
========

The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for software
and other kinds of works.

   The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed
to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By contrast,
the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to
share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it remains
free software for all its users.  We, the Free Software Foundation, use
the GNU General Public License for most of our software; it applies
also to any other work released this way by its authors.  You can apply
it to your programs, too.

   When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these things.

   To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you
these rights or asking you to surrender the rights.  Therefore, you
have certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software,
or if you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.

   For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same
freedoms that you received.  You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code.  And you must show them these terms so they
know their rights.

   Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps:
(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) offer you this License
giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify it.

   For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearly explains
that there is no warranty for this free software.  For both users' and
authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be marked as
changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to
authors of previous versions.

   Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run
modified versions of the software inside them, although the
manufacturer can do so.  This is fundamentally incompatible with the
aim of protecting users' freedom to change the software.  The
systematic pattern of such abuse occurs in the area of products for
individuals to use, which is precisely where it is most unacceptable.
Therefore, we have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the
practice for those products.  If such problems arise substantially in
other domains, we stand ready to extend this provision to those domains
in future versions of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom of
users.

   Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of
software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it effectively proprietary.  To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.

   The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS
====================

  0. Definitions.

     "This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public
     License.

     "Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to other
     kinds of works, such as semiconductor masks.

     "The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this
     License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" and
     "recipients" may be individuals or organizations.

     To "modify" a work means to copy from or adapt all or part of the
     work in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the
     making of an exact copy.  The resulting work is called a "modified
     version" of the earlier work or a work "based on" the earlier work.

     A "covered work" means either the unmodified Program or a work
     based on the Program.

     To "propagate" a work means to do anything with it that, without
     permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for
     infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it
     on a computer or modifying a private copy.  Propagation includes
     copying, distribution (with or without modification), making
     available to the public, and in some countries other activities as
     well.

     To "convey" a work means any kind of propagation that enables other
     parties to make or receive copies.  Mere interaction with a user
     through a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not
     conveying.

     An interactive user interface displays "Appropriate Legal Notices"
     to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible
     feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2)
     tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to
     the extent that warranties are provided), that licensees may
     convey the work under this License, and how to view a copy of this
     License.  If the interface presents a list of user commands or
     options, such as a menu, a prominent item in the list meets this
     criterion.

  1. Source Code.

     The "source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work
     for making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any
     non-source form of a work.

     A "Standard Interface" means an interface that either is an
     official standard defined by a recognized standards body, or, in
     the case of interfaces specified for a particular programming
     language, one that is widely used among developers working in that
     language.

     The "System Libraries" of an executable work include anything,
     other than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal
     form of packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that
     Major Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work
     with that Major Component, or to implement a Standard Interface
     for which an implementation is available to the public in source
     code form.  A "Major Component", in this context, means a major
     essential component (kernel, window system, and so on) of the
     specific operating system (if any) on which the executable work
     runs, or a compiler used to produce the work, or an object code
     interpreter used to run it.

     The "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code form means all
     the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable
     work) run the object code and to modify the work, including
     scripts to control those activities.  However, it does not include
     the work's System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally
     available free programs which are used unmodified in performing
     those activities but which are not part of the work.  For example,
     Corresponding Source includes interface definition files
     associated with source files for the work, and the source code for
     shared libraries and dynamically linked subprograms that the work
     is specifically designed to require, such as by intimate data
     communication or control flow between those subprograms and other
     parts of the work.

     The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users can
     regenerate automatically from other parts of the Corresponding
     Source.

     The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is that
     same work.

  2. Basic Permissions.

     All rights granted under this License are granted for the term of
     copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the stated
     conditions are met.  This License explicitly affirms your unlimited
     permission to run the unmodified Program.  The output from running
     a covered work is covered by this License only if the output,
     given its content, constitutes a covered work.  This License
     acknowledges your rights of fair use or other equivalent, as
     provided by copyright law.

     You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do not
     convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise
     remains in force.  You may convey covered works to others for the
     sole purpose of having them make modifications exclusively for
     you, or provide you with facilities for running those works,
     provided that you comply with the terms of this License in
     conveying all material for which you do not control copyright.
     Those thus making or running the covered works for you must do so
     exclusively on your behalf, under your direction and control, on
     terms that prohibit them from making any copies of your
     copyrighted material outside their relationship with you.

     Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under
     the conditions stated below.  Sublicensing is not allowed; section
     10 makes it unnecessary.

  3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention Law.

     No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological
     measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under
     article 11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December
     1996, or similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of
     such measures.

     When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power to forbid
     circumvention of technological measures to the extent such
     circumvention is effected by exercising rights under this License
     with respect to the covered work, and you disclaim any intention
     to limit operation or modification of the work as a means of
     enforcing, against the work's users, your or third parties' legal
     rights to forbid circumvention of technological measures.

  4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

     You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you
     receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and
     appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice;
     keep intact all notices stating that this License and any
     non-permissive terms added in accord with section 7 apply to the
     code; keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and
     give all recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.

     You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey,
     and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.

  5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.

     You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifications to
     produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under the
     terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these
     conditions:

       a. The work must carry prominent notices stating that you
          modified it, and giving a relevant date.

       b. The work must carry prominent notices stating that it is
          released under this License and any conditions added under
          section 7.  This requirement modifies the requirement in
          section 4 to "keep intact all notices".

       c. You must license the entire work, as a whole, under this
          License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy.  This
          License will therefore apply, along with any applicable
          section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all
          its parts, regardless of how they are packaged.  This License
          gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but
          it does not invalidate such permission if you have separately
          received it.

       d. If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must display
          Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the Program has
          interactive interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal
          Notices, your work need not make them do so.

     A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent
     works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covered
     work, and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger
     program, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is
     called an "aggregate" if the compilation and its resulting
     copyright are not used to limit the access or legal rights of the
     compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit.
     Inclusion of a covered work in an aggregate does not cause this
     License to apply to the other parts of the aggregate.

  6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.

     You may convey a covered work in object code form under the terms
     of sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the
     machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this
     License, in one of these ways:

       a. Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
          (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by the
          Corresponding Source fixed on a durable physical medium
          customarily used for software interchange.

       b. Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
          (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by a
          written offer, valid for at least three years and valid for
          as long as you offer spare parts or customer support for that
          product model, to give anyone who possesses the object code
          either (1) a copy of the Corresponding Source for all the
          software in the product that is covered by this License, on a
          durable physical medium customarily used for software
          interchange, for a price no more than your reasonable cost of
          physically performing this conveying of source, or (2) access
          to copy the Corresponding Source from a network server at no
          charge.

       c. Convey individual copies of the object code with a copy of
          the written offer to provide the Corresponding Source.  This
          alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercially,
          and only if you received the object code with such an offer,
          in accord with subsection 6b.

       d. Convey the object code by offering access from a designated
          place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent access
          to the Corresponding Source in the same way through the same
          place at no further charge.  You need not require recipients
          to copy the Corresponding Source along with the object code.
          If the place to copy the object code is a network server, the
          Corresponding Source may be on a different server (operated
          by you or a third party) that supports equivalent copying
          facilities, provided you maintain clear directions next to
          the object code saying where to find the Corresponding Source.
          Regardless of what server hosts the Corresponding Source, you
          remain obligated to ensure that it is available for as long
          as needed to satisfy these requirements.

       e. Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission,
          provided you inform other peers where the object code and
          Corresponding Source of the work are being offered to the
          general public at no charge under subsection 6d.


     A separable portion of the object code, whose source code is
     excluded from the Corresponding Source as a System Library, need
     not be included in conveying the object code work.

     A "User Product" is either (1) a "consumer product", which means
     any tangible personal property which is normally used for personal,
     family, or household purposes, or (2) anything designed or sold for
     incorporation into a dwelling.  In determining whether a product
     is a consumer product, doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of
     coverage.  For a particular product received by a particular user,
     "normally used" refers to a typical or common use of that class of
     product, regardless of the status of the particular user or of the
     way in which the particular user actually uses, or expects or is
     expected to use, the product.  A product is a consumer product
     regardless of whether the product has substantial commercial,
     industrial or non-consumer uses, unless such uses represent the
     only significant mode of use of the product.

     "Installation Information" for a User Product means any methods,
     procedures, authorization keys, or other information required to
     install and execute modified versions of a covered work in that
     User Product from a modified version of its Corresponding Source.
     The information must suffice to ensure that the continued
     functioning of the modified object code is in no case prevented or
     interfered with solely because modification has been made.

     If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with,
     or specifically for use in, a User Product, and the conveying
     occurs as part of a transaction in which the right of possession
     and use of the User Product is transferred to the recipient in
     perpetuity or for a fixed term (regardless of how the transaction
     is characterized), the Corresponding Source conveyed under this
     section must be accompanied by the Installation Information.  But
     this requirement does not apply if neither you nor any third party
     retains the ability to install modified object code on the User
     Product (for example, the work has been installed in ROM).

     The requirement to provide Installation Information does not
     include a requirement to continue to provide support service,
     warranty, or updates for a work that has been modified or
     installed by the recipient, or for the User Product in which it
     has been modified or installed.  Access to a network may be denied
     when the modification itself materially and adversely affects the
     operation of the network or violates the rules and protocols for
     communication across the network.

     Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information
     provided, in accord with this section must be in a format that is
     publicly documented (and with an implementation available to the
     public in source code form), and must require no special password
     or key for unpacking, reading or copying.

  7. Additional Terms.

     "Additional permissions" are terms that supplement the terms of
     this License by making exceptions from one or more of its
     conditions.  Additional permissions that are applicable to the
     entire Program shall be treated as though they were included in
     this License, to the extent that they are valid under applicable
     law.  If additional permissions apply only to part of the Program,
     that part may be used separately under those permissions, but the
     entire Program remains governed by this License without regard to
     the additional permissions.

     When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your option
     remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any part
     of it.  (Additional permissions may be written to require their own
     removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)  You may place
     additional permissions on material, added by you to a covered work,
     for which you have or can give appropriate copyright permission.

     Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material
     you add to a covered work, you may (if authorized by the copyright
     holders of that material) supplement the terms of this License
     with terms:

       a. Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently from
          the terms of sections 15 and 16 of this License; or

       b. Requiring preservation of specified reasonable legal notices
          or author attributions in that material or in the Appropriate
          Legal Notices displayed by works containing it; or

       c. Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that material,
          or requiring that modified versions of such material be
          marked in reasonable ways as different from the original
          version; or

       d. Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors
          or authors of the material; or

       e. Declining to grant rights under trademark law for use of some
          trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or

       f. Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of that
          material by anyone who conveys the material (or modified
          versions of it) with contractual assumptions of liability to
          the recipient, for any liability that these contractual
          assumptions directly impose on those licensors and authors.

     All other non-permissive additional terms are considered "further
     restrictions" within the meaning of section 10.  If the Program as
     you received it, or any part of it, contains a notice stating that
     it is governed by this License along with a term that is a further
     restriction, you may remove that term.  If a license document
     contains a further restriction but permits relicensing or
     conveying under this License, you may add to a covered work
     material governed by the terms of that license document, provided
     that the further restriction does not survive such relicensing or
     conveying.

     If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this section, you
     must place, in the relevant source files, a statement of the
     additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indicating
     where to find the applicable terms.

     Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stated in
     the form of a separately written license, or stated as exceptions;
     the above requirements apply either way.

  8. Termination.

     You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly
     provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propagate or
     modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights
     under this License (including any patent licenses granted under
     the third paragraph of section 11).

     However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your
     license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)
     provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly
     and finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the
     copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
     reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.

     Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
     reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
     violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
     received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from
     that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days
     after your receipt of the notice.

     Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate
     the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from
     you under this License.  If your rights have been terminated and
     not permanently reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new
     licenses for the same material under section 10.

  9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.

     You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or
     run a copy of the Program.  Ancillary propagation of a covered work
     occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer
     transmission to receive a copy likewise does not require
     acceptance.  However, nothing other than this License grants you
     permission to propagate or modify any covered work.  These actions
     infringe copyright if you do not accept this License.  Therefore,
     by modifying or propagating a covered work, you indicate your
     acceptance of this License to do so.

 10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.

     Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automatically
     receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modify and
     propagate that work, subject to this License.  You are not
     responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties with this
     License.

     An "entity transaction" is a transaction transferring control of an
     organization, or substantially all assets of one, or subdividing an
     organization, or merging organizations.  If propagation of a
     covered work results from an entity transaction, each party to that
     transaction who receives a copy of the work also receives whatever
     licenses to the work the party's predecessor in interest had or
     could give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to
     possession of the Corresponding Source of the work from the
     predecessor in interest, if the predecessor has it or can get it
     with reasonable efforts.

     You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise of the
     rights granted or affirmed under this License.  For example, you
     may not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for
     exercise of rights granted under this License, and you may not
     initiate litigation (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a
     lawsuit) alleging that any patent claim is infringed by making,
     using, selling, offering for sale, or importing the Program or any
     portion of it.

 11. Patents.

     A "contributor" is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this
     License of the Program or a work on which the Program is based.
     The work thus licensed is called the contributor's "contributor
     version".

     A contributor's "essential patent claims" are all patent claims
     owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or
     hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some manner,
     permitted by this License, of making, using, or selling its
     contributor version, but do not include claims that would be
     infringed only as a consequence of further modification of the
     contributor version.  For purposes of this definition, "control"
     includes the right to grant patent sublicenses in a manner
     consistent with the requirements of this License.

     Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide,
     royalty-free patent license under the contributor's essential
     patent claims, to make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and
     otherwise run, modify and propagate the contents of its
     contributor version.

     In the following three paragraphs, a "patent license" is any
     express agreement or commitment, however denominated, not to
     enforce a patent (such as an express permission to practice a
     patent or covenant not to sue for patent infringement).  To
     "grant" such a patent license to a party means to make such an
     agreement or commitment not to enforce a patent against the party.

     If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent
     license, and the Corresponding Source of the work is not available
     for anyone to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this
     License, through a publicly available network server or other
     readily accessible means, then you must either (1) cause the
     Corresponding Source to be so available, or (2) arrange to deprive
     yourself of the benefit of the patent license for this particular
     work, or (3) arrange, in a manner consistent with the requirements
     of this License, to extend the patent license to downstream
     recipients.  "Knowingly relying" means you have actual knowledge
     that, but for the patent license, your conveying the covered work
     in a country, or your recipient's use of the covered work in a
     country, would infringe one or more identifiable patents in that
     country that you have reason to believe are valid.

     If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or
     arrangement, you convey, or propagate by procuring conveyance of, a
     covered work, and grant a patent license to some of the parties
     receiving the covered work authorizing them to use, propagate,
     modify or convey a specific copy of the covered work, then the
     patent license you grant is automatically extended to all
     recipients of the covered work and works based on it.

     A patent license is "discriminatory" if it does not include within
     the scope of its coverage, prohibits the exercise of, or is
     conditioned on the non-exercise of one or more of the rights that
     are specifically granted under this License.  You may not convey a
     covered work if you are a party to an arrangement with a third
     party that is in the business of distributing software, under
     which you make payment to the third party based on the extent of
     your activity of conveying the work, and under which the third
     party grants, to any of the parties who would receive the covered
     work from you, a discriminatory patent license (a) in connection
     with copies of the covered work conveyed by you (or copies made
     from those copies), or (b) primarily for and in connection with
     specific products or compilations that contain the covered work,
     unless you entered into that arrangement, or that patent license
     was granted, prior to 28 March 2007.

     Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting
     any implied license or other defenses to infringement that may
     otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law.

 12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.

     If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order,
     agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this
     License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this
     License.  If you cannot convey a covered work so as to satisfy
     simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other
     pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not convey it
     at all.  For example, if you agree to terms that obligate you to
     collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom you
     convey the Program, the only way you could satisfy both those
     terms and this License would be to refrain entirely from conveying
     the Program.

 13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.

     Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have
     permission to link or combine any covered work with a work licensed
     under version 3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into a
     single combined work, and to convey the resulting work.  The terms
     of this License will continue to apply to the part which is the
     covered work, but the special requirements of the GNU Affero
     General Public License, section 13, concerning interaction through
     a network will apply to the combination as such.

 14. Revised Versions of this License.

     The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new
     versions of the GNU General Public License from time to time.
     Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present
     version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or
     concerns.

     Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the
     Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU
     General Public License "or any later version" applies to it, you
     have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
     that numbered version or of any later version published by the
     Free Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a
     version number of the GNU General Public License, you may choose
     any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.

     If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide which future
     versions of the GNU General Public License can be used, that
     proxy's public statement of acceptance of a version permanently
     authorizes you to choose that version for the Program.

     Later license versions may give you additional or different
     permissions.  However, no additional obligations are imposed on any
     author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to follow a
     later version.

 15. Disclaimer of Warranty.

     THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
     APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE
     COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS"
     WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
     INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE
     RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.
     SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL
     NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

 16. Limitation of Liability.

     IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
     WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES
     AND/OR CONVEYS THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU
     FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR
     CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE
     THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA
     BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD
     PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
     PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF
     THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

 17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.

     If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided
     above cannot be given local legal effect according to their terms,
     reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely
     approximates an absolute waiver of all civil liability in
     connection with the Program, unless a warranty or assumption of
     liability accompanies a copy of the Program in return for a fee.


END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
===========================

How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
=============================================

If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these
terms.

   To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least the
"copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

     ONE LINE TO GIVE THE PROGRAM'S NAME AND A BRIEF IDEA OF WHAT IT DOES.
     Copyright (C) YEAR NAME OF AUTHOR

     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
     the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at
     your option) any later version.

     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
     WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
     General Public License for more details.

     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
     along with this program.  If not, see `http://www.gnu.org/licenses/'.

   Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper
mail.

   If the program does terminal interaction, make it output a short
notice like this when it starts in an interactive mode:

     PROGRAM Copyright (C) YEAR NAME OF AUTHOR
     This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
     This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
     under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.

   The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the
appropriate parts of the General Public License.  Of course, your
program's commands might be different; for a GUI interface, you would
use an "about box".

   You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or
school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if
necessary.  For more information on this, and how to apply and follow
the GNU GPL, see `http://www.gnu.org/licenses/'.

   The GNU General Public License does not permit incorporating your
program into proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine
library, you may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary
applications with the library.  If this is what you want to do, use the
GNU Lesser General Public License instead of this License.  But first,
please read `http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/why-not-lgpl.html'.

Index
*****

-animateSpeed, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2842)
-autoDisplayComment, option:                   See 4.6.      (line 2847)
-autoDisplayTags, option:                      See 4.6.      (line 2847)
-pasteSelection, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2853)
.icsrc:                                        See 4.4.      (line 2179)
<, Button:                                     See 3.2.      (line  414)
<<, Button:                                    See 3.2.      (line  447)
>, Button:                                     See 3.2.      (line  434)
>>, Button:                                    See 3.2.      (line  466)
abort, ICS command:                            See 5.        (line 3270)
Abort, Menu Item:                              See 3.5.      (line  754)
About XBoard, Menu Item:                       See 3.8.      (line 1538)
Absolute Analysis Scores, Menu Item:           See 3.7.1.    (line  883)
absoluteAnalysisScores, option:                See 4.6.      (line 2891)
accept, ICS command:                           See 5.        (line 3257)
Accept, Menu Item:                             See 3.5.      (line  726)
Action, Menu:                                  See 3.5.      (line  725)
adapterCommand, option:                        See 4.2.      (line 1880)
adjourn, ICS command:                          See 5.        (line 3270)
Adjourn, Menu Item:                            See 3.5.      (line  749)
Adjudicate Draw, Menu Item:                    See 3.5.      (line  782)
Adjudicate to Black, Menu Item:                See 3.5.      (line  782)
Adjudicate to White, Menu Item:                See 3.5.      (line  782)
adjudicateDrawMoves, option:                   See 4.7.      (line 2919)
adjudicateLossThreshold, option:               See 4.7.      (line 2911)
Adjudications, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.4.    (line 1118)
afterGame, option:                             See 4.3.      (line 2063)
afterTourney, option:                          See 4.3.      (line 2063)
alarm, option:                                 See 4.4.      (line 2265)
Almost Always Queen, Menu Item:                See 3.7.1.    (line  887)
Also match left-right flipped position, Menu Item:See 3.7.7. (line 1431)
Also match reversed colors, Menu Item:         See 3.7.7.    (line 1431)
alwaysPromoteToQueen, option:                  See 4.6.      (line 2570)
Analysis Mode, Menu Item:                      See 3.4.      (line  582)
Analyze Game, Menu Item:                       See 3.4.      (line  630)
Animate Dragging, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.1.    (line  901)
Animate Moving, Menu Item:                     See 3.7.1.    (line  908)
animate, option:                               See 4.6.      (line 2838)
animateDragging, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2834)
animateMoving, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2838)
Animation Speed, Menu Item:                    See 3.7.1.    (line 1070)
Annotate, Menu Item:                           See 3.2.      (line  390)
appendPV, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2885)
at sign, option:                               See 4.5.      (line 2472)
Authors:                                       See 10.       (line 3480)
Auto Comment, Menu Item:                       See 3.7.5.    (line 1154)
Auto Flag, Menu Item:                          See 3.7.1.    (line  917)
Auto Flip View, Menu Item:                     See 3.7.1.    (line  927)
Auto Kibitz, Menu Item:                        See 3.7.5.    (line 1145)
Auto Observe, Menu Item:                       See 3.7.5.    (line 1162)
Auto Raise Board, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.5.    (line 1175)
Auto Save, Menu Item:                          See 3.7.5.    (line 1180)
Auto-Refresh Seek Graph, Menu Item:            See 3.7.5.    (line 1222)
autobs, option:                                See 4.4.      (line 2206)
autoCallFlag, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2202)
autocomm, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2198)
autoComment, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2198)
autoCopyPV, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2858)
autoflag, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2202)
autoflip, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2630)
autoFlipView, option:                          See 4.6.      (line 2630)
autoInstall, option:                           See 4.6.      (line 2540)
autoKibitz, option:                            See 4.4.      (line 2210)
autoLogo, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2524)
autoObserve, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2206)
autoraise, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2626)
autoRaiseBoard, option:                        See 4.6.      (line 2626)
autoRefresh, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2227)
autosave, option:                              See 4.5.      (line 2413)
autoSaveGames, option:                         See 4.5.      (line 2413)
Back to Start, Menu Item:                      See 3.2.      (line  447)
Background Observe, Menu Item:                 See 3.7.5.    (line 1187)
backgroundObserve, option:                     See 4.4.      (line 2233)
Backward, Menu Item:                           See 3.2.      (line  414)
Basic operation:                               See 2.        (line   57)
bell, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2557)
blackPieceColor, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2782)
blind, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2695)
Blindfold, Menu Item:                          See 3.7.1.    (line  940)
blindfold, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2695)
board size:                                    See 4.6.      (line 2582)
Board, Menu Item:                              See 3.3.      (line  555)
boardHeight, option:                           See 4.8.      (line 3068)
boardSize, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2582)
boardWidth, option:                            See 4.8.      (line 3073)
Book, Menu Item:                               See 3.6.      (line  844)
bookDepth, option:                             See 4.2.      (line 1924)
bookVariation, option:                         See 4.2.      (line 1928)
Bug reports:                                   See 9.        (line 3462)
Bugs <1>:                                      See 9.        (line 3462)
Bugs:                                          See 8.        (line 3407)
buttons, option:                               See 4.6.      (line 2652)
Call Flag, Menu Item:                          See 3.5.      (line  738)
checkMates, option:                            See 4.7.      (line 2924)
Chess engine options:                          See 4.1.      (line 1605)
CHESSDIR:                                      See 7.        (line 3398)
clock, option:                                 See 4.1.      (line 1622)
clockFont, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2716)
clockMode, option:                             See 4.1.      (line 1622)
CloneTourney, Menu Item:                       See 3.7.6.    (line 1381)
cmail:                                         See 11.       (line 3532)
colorChallenge, option:                        See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorChannel, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorChannel1, option:                         See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorCShout, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2308)
Colorize Messages, Menu Item:                  See 3.7.5.    (line 1257)
colorize, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2292)
colorizeMessages, option:                      See 4.4.      (line 2292)
colorKibitz, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorNickNames, option:                        See 4.8.      (line 3128)
colorNormal, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorRequest, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2308)
Colors <1>:                                    See 4.6.      (line 2782)
Colors:                                        See 4.4.      (line 2292)
colorSeek, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorShout, option:                            See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorSShout, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2308)
colorTell, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2308)
commentFont, option:                           See 4.6.      (line 2738)
Comments, Menu Item:                           See 3.3.      (line  531)
Common Engine, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.3.    (line 1093)
Contributors:                                  See 10.       (line 3480)
coordFont, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2723)
coords, option:                                See 4.6.      (line 2622)
Copy Game List, Menu Item:                     See 3.2.      (line  290)
Copy Game, Menu Item:                          See 3.2.      (line  271)
Copy Position, Menu Item:                      See 3.2.      (line  280)
cy, option:                                    See 4.3.      (line 2025)
darkBackTextureFile, option:                   See 4.6.      (line 2818)
darkSquareColor, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2782)
dateThreshold, option:                         See 4.8.      (line 3195)
debug, option:                                 See 4.8.      (line 3135)
debugFile, option:                             See 4.8.      (line 3138)
debugMode, option:                             See 4.8.      (line 3135)
decline, ICS command:                          See 5.        (line 3257)
Decline, Menu Item:                            See 3.5.      (line  732)
Default number of Games, Menu Item:            See 3.7.6.    (line 1323)
defaultCacheSizeEGTB, option:                  See 4.2.      (line 1959)
defaultFrcPosition, option:                    See 4.8.      (line 3088)
defaultHashSize, option:                       See 4.2.      (line 1953)
defaultMatchGames, option:                     See 4.3.      (line 1998)
defaultPathEGTB, option:                       See 4.2.      (line 1965)
defaultTourneyName, option:                    See 4.3.      (line 2042)
delayAfterQuit, option:                        See 4.8.      (line 3173)
delayBeforeQuit, option:                       See 4.8.      (line 3173)
Disable own engine bools be default, Menu Item:See 3.7.6.    (line 1358)
discourageOwnBooks, option:                    See 4.2.      (line 1918)
disguisePromotedPieces, option:                See 4.4.      (line 2256)
display, option:                               See 4.6.      (line 2502)
drag, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2834)
draw, ICS command:                             See 5.        (line 3270)
Draw, Menu Item:                               See 3.5.      (line  744)
Drop Menu, Menu Item:                          See 3.7.1.    (line  946)
dropMenu, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2864)
Dual Board, Menu Item:                         See 3.7.5.    (line 1194)
dualBoard, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2247)
Edit Book, Menu Item:                          See 3.2.      (line  379)
Edit Comment, Menu Item:                       See 3.2.      (line  372)
Edit Game, Menu Item:                          See 3.2.      (line  305)
Edit Menu:                                     See 3.2.      (line  270)
Edit Position, Menu Item:                      See 3.2.      (line  321)
Edit Tags, Menu Item:                          See 3.2.      (line  348)
egtFormats, option:                            See 4.2.      (line 1969)
Elo of strongest player, Menu Item:            See 3.7.7.    (line 1401)
Elo of weakest player, Menu Item:              See 3.7.7.    (line 1401)
eloThresholdAny, option:                       See 4.8.      (line 3190)
eloThresholdBoth, option:                      See 4.8.      (line 3190)
Enable Variation Trees, Menu Item:             See 3.7.1.    (line  952)
Engine #1 Settings, Menu Item:                 See 3.6.      (line  822)
Engine #2 Settings, Menu Item:                 See 3.6.      (line  822)
Engine Menu:                                   See 3.6.      (line  790)
Engine Settings:                               See 4.2.      (line 1862)
Engine Settings, Menu Item:                    See 3.6.      (line  822)
engineDebugOutput, option:                     See 4.8.      (line 3145)
Environment variables:                         See 7.        (line 3398)
evalThreshold, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2662)
evalZoom, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2658)
examine, ICS command:                          See 5.        (line 3293)
Exit, Menu Item:                               See 3.1.      (line  265)
exit, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2562)
fb, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1740)
fcp, option:                                   See 4.1.      (line 1722)
fd, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1755)
fe, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1729)
fh, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1747)
File Menu:                                     See 3.1.      (line  129)
File with Start Positions, Menu Item:          See 3.7.6.    (line 1342)
find position, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.7.    (line 1406)
finger, ICS command:                           See 5.        (line 3280)
First Black Move, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.5.    (line 1232)
First White Move, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.5.    (line 1232)
firstChessProgram, option:                     See 4.1.      (line 1722)
firstComputerString, option:                   See 4.1.      (line 1790)
firstDirectory, option:                        See 4.1.      (line 1755)
firstEngine, option:                           See 4.1.      (line 1729)
firstHasOwnBookUCI, option:                    See 4.2.      (line 1912)
firstHost, option:                             See 4.1.      (line 1747)
firstInitString, option:                       See 4.1.      (line 1764)
firstIsUCI, option:                            See 4.2.      (line 1864)
firstLogo, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2518)
firstNeedsNoncompliantFEN, option:             See 4.1.      (line 1840)
firstNPS, option:                              See 4.1.      (line 1645)
firstOptions, option:                          See 4.1.      (line 1829)
firstPgnName, option:                          See 4.2.      (line 1947)
firstPlaysBlack, option:                       See 4.1.      (line 1740)
firstProtocolVersion, option:                  See 4.1.      (line 1807)
firstScoreAbs, option:                         See 4.1.      (line 1815)
firstTimeOdds, option:                         See 4.1.      (line 1663)
firstXBook, option:                            See 4.2.      (line 1912)
Flash Moves, Menu Item:                        See 3.7.1.    (line 1065)
Flash Rate, Menu Item:                         See 3.7.1.    (line 1065)
flash, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2678)
flashCount, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2678)
flashRate, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2678)
Flip View, Menu Item:                          See 3.3.      (line  481)
flip, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2634)
flipView, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2634)
fn, option:                                    See 4.2.      (line 1947)
fNoOwnBookUCI, option:                         See 4.2.      (line 1912)
Font, clock:                                   See 4.6.      (line 2716)
Font, comment:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2738)
Font, coordinates:                             See 4.6.      (line 2723)
Font, gameList:                                See 4.6.      (line 2751)
Font, ics:                                     See 4.6.      (line 2741)
Font, message:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2731)
Font, moveHistory:                             See 4.6.      (line 2746)
Font, tags:                                    See 4.6.      (line 2735)
fontSizeTolerance, option:                     See 4.6.      (line 2757)
Forward to End, Menu Item:                     See 3.2.      (line  466)
Forward, Menu Item:                            See 3.2.      (line  434)
fSAN, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2704)
fUCCI, option:                                 See 4.2.      (line 1874)
fUCI, option:                                  See 4.2.      (line 1864)
fUSI, option:                                  See 4.2.      (line 1874)
Game File with Opening Lines, Menu Item:       See 3.7.6.    (line 1342)
Game List Tags, Menu Item <1>:                 See 3.7.9.    (line 1457)
Game List Tags, Menu Item:                     See 3.3.      (line  564)
Game Number, Menu Item:                        See 3.7.6.    (line 1342)
gameListFont, option:                          See 4.6.      (line 2751)
gameListTags, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2463)
games, ICS command:                            See 5.        (line 3246)
gateway, option:                               See 4.4.      (line 2129)
General Options, Menu Item:                    See 3.7.1.    (line  880)
geometry, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2502)
Get Move List, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.5.    (line 1199)
getMoveList, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2261)
Help Menu:                                     See 3.8.      (line 1523)
help, ICS command:                             See 5.        (line 3231)
Hide Thinking, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.1.    (line  959)
highlight Arrow, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2691)
Highlight Last Move, Menu Item:                See 3.7.1.    (line  969)
Highlight with Arrow, Menu Item:               See 3.7.1.    (line  975)
highlight, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2687)
highlightLastMove, option:                     See 4.6.      (line 2687)
highlightMoveWithArrow, option:                See 4.6.      (line 2691)
highlightSquareColor, option:                  See 4.6.      (line 2782)
Hint, Menu Item:                               See 3.6.      (line  841)
holdingsSize, option:                          See 4.8.      (line 3080)
iconic, option:                                See 4.6.      (line 2502)
ICS:                                           See 5.        (line 3202)
ICS Alarm Time, Menu Item:                     See 3.7.5.    (line 1247)
ICS Alarm, Menu Item:                          See 3.7.5.    (line 1247)
ICS Client, Menu Item:                         See 3.4.      (line  669)
ICS Input Box, Menu Item:                      See 3.3.      (line  536)
ICS options:                                   See 4.4.      (line 2084)
ICS Options, Menu Item:                        See 3.7.5.    (line 1142)
ICS, addresses:                                See 5.        (line 3202)
ics, option:                                   See 4.4.      (line 2085)
icsAlarm, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2265)
icsAlarmTime, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2269)
icscomm, option:                               See 4.4.      (line 2137)
icsFont, option:                               See 4.6.      (line 2741)
icshelper, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2103)
icshost, option:                               See 4.4.      (line 2090)
icsinput, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2194)
icslogon, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2179)
icsport, option:                               See 4.4.      (line 2099)
inc, option:                                   See 4.1.      (line 1615)
Info XBoard, Menu Item:                        See 3.8.      (line 1524)
init, option:                                  See 4.5.      (line 2472)
initalMode, option:                            See 4.8.      (line 3000)
initString, option:                            See 4.1.      (line 1764)
Internet Chess Server:                         See 5.        (line 3202)
internetChessServerCommPort, option:           See 4.4.      (line 2137)
internetChessServerHelper, option:             See 4.4.      (line 2103)
internetChessServerHost, option:               See 4.4.      (line 2090)
internetChessServerInputBox, option:           See 4.4.      (line 2194)
internetChessServerLogonScript, option:        See 4.4.      (line 2179)
internetChessServerMode, option:               See 4.4.      (line 2085)
internetChessServerPort, option:               See 4.4.      (line 2099)
introduction:
          See ``Introduction''.                              (line    9)
Keys:                                          See 3.9.      (line 1543)
legal, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2578)
lgf, option:                                   See 4.5.      (line 2376)
lgi, option:                                   See 4.5.      (line 2376)
lightSquareColor, option:                      See 4.6.      (line 2782)
Limitations:                                   See 8.        (line 3407)
liteBackTextureFile, option:                   See 4.6.      (line 2818)
Load and Save options:                         See 4.5.      (line 2374)
Load Engine, Menu Item:                        See 3.6.      (line  791)
Load Game Options, Menu Item:                  See 3.7.7.    (line 1391)
Load Game, Menu Item:                          See 3.1.      (line  173)
Load Next Game, Menu Item:                     See 3.9.      (line 1547)
Load Next Position, Menu Item:                 See 3.1.      (line  215)
Load Position, Menu Item:                      See 3.1.      (line  206)
Load Previous Game, Menu Item:                 See 3.9.      (line 1551)
Load Previous Position, Menu Item:             See 3.1.      (line  219)
loadGameFile, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2376)
loadGameIndex, option:                         See 4.5.      (line 2376)
loadPositionFile, option:                      See 4.5.      (line 2421)
loadPositionIndex, option:                     See 4.5.      (line 2421)
logoDir, option:                               See 4.6.      (line 2524)
logoSize, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2511)
lowTimeWarning, option:                        See 4.4.      (line 2273)
lowTimeWarningColor, option:                   See 4.6.      (line 2782)
lpf, option:                                   See 4.5.      (line 2421)
lpi, option:                                   See 4.5.      (line 2421)
Machine Black, Menu Item:                      See 3.4.      (line  574)
Machine match, Menu Item:                      See 3.4.      (line  693)
Machine White, Menu Item:                      See 3.4.      (line  570)
Mail Move, Menu Item:                          See 3.1.      (line  262)
Major modes:                                   See 1.        (line   19)
Man XBoard, Menu Item:                         See 3.8.      (line 1531)
Match Options, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.6.    (line 1265)
matchGames, option:                            See 4.1.      (line 1700)
matchMode, option:                             See 4.1.      (line 1712)
matchPause, option:                            See 4.3.      (line 2003)
materialDraws, option:                         See 4.7.      (line 2936)
mcBookMode, option:                            See 4.2.      (line 1932)
memoHeaders, option:                           See 4.6.      (line 2901)
Menu, Action:                                  See 3.5.      (line  725)
Menu, Edit:                                    See 3.2.      (line  270)
Menu, Engine:                                  See 3.6.      (line  790)
Menu, File:                                    See 3.1.      (line  129)
Menu, Help:                                    See 3.8.      (line 1523)
Menu, Mode:                                    See 3.4.      (line  569)
Menu, Options:                                 See 3.7.      (line  877)
Menu, View:                                    See 3.3.      (line  480)
Menus:                                         See 3.        (line  126)
messageFont, option:                           See 4.6.      (line 2731)
mg, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1700)
mm, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1712)
Mode Menu:                                     See 3.4.      (line  569)
mode, option:                                  See 4.8.      (line 3000)
mono, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2666)
monoMode, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2666)
Move Now, Menu Item:                           See 3.6.      (line  854)
Move Sound, Menu Item:                         See 3.7.1.    (line  980)
moveHistoryFont, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2746)
moves, option:                                 See 4.4.      (line 2261)
movesound, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2557)
movesPerSession, option:                       See 4.1.      (line 1611)
mps, option:                                   See 4.1.      (line 1611)
msLoginDelay, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2188)
nameOfDebugFile, option:                       See 4.8.      (line 3138)
narrow, Menu Item:                             See 3.7.7.    (line 1406)
ncp, option:                                   See 4.8.      (line 2971)
New Game, Menu Item:                           See 3.1.      (line  130)
New Shuffle Game, Menu Item:                   See 3.1.      (line  139)
New variant, Menu Item:                        See 3.1.      (line  154)
niceEngines, option:                           See 4.1.      (line 1821)
noChessProgram, option:                        See 4.8.      (line 2971)
noGUI, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2505)
null move:                                     See 3.4.      (line  582)
number of consecutive positions, Menu Item:    See 3.7.7.    (line 1424)
Number of tourney cycles, Menu Item:           See 3.7.6.    (line 1323)
observe, ICS command:                          See 5.        (line 3289)
oldmoves, ICS command:                         See 5.        (line 3293)
oldsave, option:                               See 4.5.      (line 2459)
oldSaveStyle, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2459)
One-Click Moving, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.1.    (line  989)
oneClickMove, option:                          See 4.6.      (line 2550)
onlyOwnGames, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2417)
Open Chat Window, Menu Item:                   See 3.3.      (line  543)
Options:                                       See 4.        (line 1586)
Options Menu:                                  See 3.7.      (line  877)
Options, adjudication:                         See 4.7.      (line 2910)
options, Chess engine:                         See 4.1.      (line 1605)
Options, ICS:                                  See 4.4.      (line 2084)
Options, Load and Save:                        See 4.5.      (line 2374)
Options, miscellaneous:                        See 4.8.      (line 2970)
Options, Tournament:                           See 4.3.      (line 1997)
Options, User interface:                       See 4.6.      (line 2498)
Other programs:                                See 12.       (line 3730)
overrideLineGap, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2615)
pairingEngine, option:                         See 4.3.      (line 2050)
participants, option:                          See 4.3.      (line 2029)
Paste Game, Menu Item:                         See 3.2.      (line  296)
Paste Position, Menu Item:                     See 3.2.      (line  300)
Pause, Menu Item:                              See 3.4.      (line  699)
Periodic Updates, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.1.    (line 1001)
periodic, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2699)
periodicUpdates, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2699)
pgnEventHeader, option:                        See 4.5.      (line 2446)
pgnExtendedInfo, option:                       See 4.5.      (line 2441)
pgnNumberTag, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2450)
pid, option:                                   See 4.6.      (line 2766)
pieceImageDirectory, option:                   See 4.6.      (line 2766)
pieceMenu, option:                             See 4.6.      (line 2870)
pieceNickNames, option:                        See 4.8.      (line 3119)
pieceToCharTable, option:                      See 4.8.      (line 3093)
Play Move(s) of Clicked PV, Menu Item:         See 3.7.1.    (line 1007)
polyglotBook, option:                          See 4.2.      (line 1903)
polyglotDir, option:                           See 4.2.      (line 1896)
Ponder Next Move, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.1.    (line 1015)
ponder, option:                                See 4.1.      (line 1691)
ponderNextMove, option:                        See 4.1.      (line 1691)
Popup Exit Message, Menu Item:                 See 3.7.1.    (line 1021)
Popup Move Errors, Menu Item:                  See 3.7.1.    (line 1027)
popup, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2566)
popupExitMessage, option:                      See 4.6.      (line 2562)
popupMoveErrors, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2566)
Position Number, Menu Item:                    See 3.7.6.    (line 1342)
pre, option:                                   See 4.4.      (line 2277)
preblack, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2283)
Premove Black, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.5.    (line 1232)
Premove White, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.5.    (line 1232)
Premove, Menu Item:                            See 3.7.5.    (line 1232)
premove, option:                               See 4.4.      (line 2277)
premoveBlack, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2283)
premoveBlackText, option:                      See 4.4.      (line 2283)
premoveHighlightColor, option:                 See 4.6.      (line 2782)
premoveWhite, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2283)
premoveWhiteText, option:                      See 4.4.      (line 2283)
prewhite, option:                              See 4.4.      (line 2283)
Problems:                                      See 9.        (line 3462)
queen, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2570)
Quiet Play, Menu Item:                         See 3.7.5.    (line 1211)
quiet, option:                                 See 4.4.      (line 2288)
quietPlay, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2288)
recentEngineList, option:                      See 4.6.      (line 2530)
recentEngines, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2530)
Recently Used Engines, In Menu:                See 3.6.      (line  866)
Reload CMail Message, Menu Item:               See 3.1.      (line  262)
Reload Same Game, Menu Item:                   See 3.9.      (line 1556)
Reload Same Position, Menu Item:               See 3.9.      (line 1561)
remoteShell, option:                           See 4.8.      (line 3159)
remoteUser, option:                            See 4.8.      (line 3164)
Replace Engine, Menu Item:                     See 3.7.6.    (line 1366)
Reporting bugs:                                See 9.        (line 3462)
Reporting problems:                            See 9.        (line 3462)
Resign, Menu Item:                             See 3.5.      (line  760)
resource name, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2502)
results, option:                               See 4.3.      (line 2036)
Retract Move, Menu Item:                       See 3.6.      (line  858)
reuse, option:                                 See 4.1.      (line 1798)
reuse2, option:                                See 4.1.      (line 1798)
reuseFirst, option:                            See 4.1.      (line 1798)
reuseSecond, option:                           See 4.1.      (line 1798)
Revert, Menu Item:                             See 3.2.      (line  390)
Rewind Index after, Menu Item:                 See 3.7.6.    (line 1342)
ringBellAfterMoves, option:                    See 4.6.      (line 2557)
rsh, option:                                   See 4.8.      (line 3159)
ruleMoves, option:                             See 4.7.      (line 2954)
ruser, option:                                 See 4.8.      (line 3164)
sameColorGames, option:                        See 4.1.      (line 1716)
Save Game Options, Menu Item:                  See 3.7.8.    (line 1440)
Save Game, Menu Item:                          See 3.1.      (line  224)
Save Games as Book, Menu Item:                 See 3.1.      (line  249)
Save Position, Menu Item:                      See 3.1.      (line  236)
Save Selected Games:                           See 3.1.      (line  245)
Save Settings Now, Menu Item:                  See 3.7.11.   (line 1482)
Save Settings on Exit, Menu Item:              See 3.7.12.   (line 1516)
Save Tourney Games, Menu Item:                 See 3.7.6.    (line 1334)
saveGameFile, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2408)
saveOutOfBookInfo, option:                     See 4.5.      (line 2454)
savePositionFile, option:                      See 4.5.      (line 2436)
saveSettingsFile, option:                      See 4.5.      (line 2472)
saveSettingsOnExit, option:                    See 4.5.      (line 2492)
Scores in Move List, Menu Item:                See 3.7.1.    (line 1036)
scoreWhite, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2896)
scp, option:                                   See 4.1.      (line 1725)
sd, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1636)
se, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1737)
Search mode, Menu Item:                        See 3.7.7.    (line 1406)
searchDepth, option:                           See 4.1.      (line 1636)
searchMode, option:                            See 4.8.      (line 3185)
searchTime, option:                            See 4.1.      (line 1629)
secondChessProgram, option:                    See 4.1.      (line 1725)
secondComputerString, option:                  See 4.1.      (line 1790)
secondDirectory, option:                       See 4.1.      (line 1755)
secondEngine, option:                          See 4.1.      (line 1737)
secondHasOwnBookUCI, option:                   See 4.2.      (line 1912)
secondHost, option:                            See 4.1.      (line 1747)
secondInitString, option:                      See 4.1.      (line 1764)
secondIsUCI, option:                           See 4.2.      (line 1864)
secondLogo, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2518)
secondNeedsNoncompliantFEN, option:            See 4.1.      (line 1840)
secondNPS, option:                             See 4.1.      (line 1645)
secondOptions, option:                         See 4.1.      (line 1829)
secondPgnName, option:                         See 4.2.      (line 1947)
secondProtocolVersion, option:                 See 4.1.      (line 1807)
secondScoreAbs, option:                        See 4.1.      (line 1815)
secondTimeOdds, option:                        See 4.1.      (line 1663)
secondXBook, option:                           See 4.2.      (line 1912)
seedBase, option:                              See 4.3.      (line 2076)
Seek Graph, Menu Item:                         See 3.7.5.    (line 1217)
seekGraph, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2218)
Select Engine, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.6.    (line 1298)
set, ICS command:                              See 5.        (line 3286)
Settings, Engine:                              See 4.2.      (line 1862)
SettingsFile, option:                          See 4.5.      (line 2472)
sg, option:                                    See 4.4.      (line 2218)
sgf, option:                                   See 4.5.      (line 2408)
sh, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1747)
Shortcut keys:                                 See 3.9.      (line 1543)
Show Coords, Menu Item:                        See 3.7.1.    (line 1040)
Show Engine Output, Menu Item:                 See 3.3.      (line  486)
Show Evaluation Graph, Menu Item:              See 3.3.      (line  516)
Show Game List, Menu Item:                     See 3.3.      (line  522)
Show Last Move, Shortcut Key:                  See 3.9.      (line 1544)
Show Move History, Menu Item:                  See 3.3.      (line  510)
Show Target Squares, Menu Item:                See 3.7.1.    (line 1044)
showButtonBar, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2652)
showCoords, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2622)
showEvalInMoveHistory, option:                 See 4.6.      (line 2711)
showTargetSquares, option:                     See 4.6.      (line 2671)
showThinking, option:                          See 4.1.      (line 1681)
shuffleOpenings, option:                       See 4.1.      (line 1854)
size, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2582)
sn, option:                                    See 4.2.      (line 1947)
sNoOwnBookUCI, option:                         See 4.2.      (line 1912)
Sound Options, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.10.   (line 1463)
soundChallenge, option:                        See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundChannel, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundChannel1, option:                         See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundCShout, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundDirectory, option:                        See 4.4.      (line 2330)
soundIcsAlarm, option:                         See 4.4.      (line 2352)
soundIcsDraw, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2363)
soundIcsLoss, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2359)
soundIcsUnfinished, option:                    See 4.4.      (line 2367)
soundIcsWin, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2355)
soundKibitz, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundMove, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2349)
soundProgram, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2321)
soundRequest, option:                          See 4.4.      (line 2343)
Sounds:                                        See 4.4.      (line 2321)
soundSeek, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundShout, option:                            See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundSShout, option:                           See 4.4.      (line 2343)
soundTell, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2343)
spf, option:                                   See 4.5.      (line 2436)
sSAN, option:                                  See 4.6.      (line 2704)
st, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1629)
Stop Examining, Menu Item:                     See 3.5.      (line  769)
Stop Observing, Menu Item:                     See 3.5.      (line  764)
sUCCI, option:                                 See 4.2.      (line 1874)
sUCI, option:                                  See 4.2.      (line 1864)
sUSI, option:                                  See 4.2.      (line 1874)
sweepPromotion, option:                        See 4.6.      (line 2574)
Sync after cycle, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.6.    (line 1289)
Sync after round, Menu Item:                   See 3.7.6.    (line 1289)
syncAfterCycle, option:                        See 4.3.      (line 2071)
syncAfterRound, option:                        See 4.3.      (line 2071)
Tags, Menu Item:                               See 3.3.      (line  526)
tagsFont, option:                              See 4.6.      (line 2735)
tc, option:                                    See 4.1.      (line 1606)
td, option:                                    See 4.5.      (line 2402)
telnet, option:                                See 4.4.      (line 2111)
telnetProgram, option:                         See 4.4.      (line 2120)
Test Legality, Menu Item:                      See 3.7.1.    (line 1051)
testClaims, option:                            See 4.7.      (line 2930)
testLegality, option:                          See 4.6.      (line 2578)
tf, option:                                    See 4.3.      (line 2011)
thinking, option:                              See 4.1.      (line 1681)
Time Control, Menu Item:                       See 3.7.2.    (line 1081)
timeControl, option:                           See 4.1.      (line 1606)
timeDelay, option:                             See 4.5.      (line 2402)
timeIncrement, option:                         See 4.1.      (line 1615)
timeOddsMode, option:                          See 4.1.      (line 1669)
title, option:                                 See 4.6.      (line 2644)
titleInWindow, option:                         See 4.6.      (line 2644)
Tournament file, Menu item:                    See 3.7.6.    (line 1269)
Tournament Options:                            See 4.3.      (line 1997)
Tourney participants, Menu Item:               See 3.7.6.    (line 1298)
Tourney type, Menu Item:                       See 3.7.6.    (line 1309)
tourneyCycles, option:                         See 4.3.      (line 2025)
tourneyFile, option:                           See 4.3.      (line 2011)
tourneyOptions, option:                        See 4.8.      (line 2991)
tourneyType, option:                           See 4.3.      (line 2019)
Training, Menu Item:                           See 3.4.      (line  659)
trivialDraws, option:                          See 4.7.      (line 2943)
trueColors, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2811)
Truncate Game, Menu Item:                      See 3.2.      (line  409)
tt, option:                                    See 4.3.      (line 2019)
Two Machines, Menu Item:                       See 3.4.      (line  578)
Upgrade Engine, Menu Item:                     See 3.7.6.    (line 1366)
Upload to Examine, Menu Item:                  See 3.5.      (line  774)
useBoardTexture, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2818)
usePolyglotBook, option:                       See 4.2.      (line 1900)
User interface options:                        See 4.6.      (line 2498)
userName, option:                              See 4.8.      (line 3168)
useTelnet, option:                             See 4.4.      (line 2111)
uxiAdapter, option:                            See 4.2.      (line 1890)
variant, option:                               See 4.8.      (line 3008)
variations, option:                            See 4.6.      (line 2879)
vars, ICS command:                             See 5.        (line 3283)
View Menu:                                     See 3.3.      (line  480)
viewer, option:                                See 4.8.      (line 2977)
viewerOptions, option:                         See 4.8.      (line 2977)
whitePieceColor, option:                       See 4.6.      (line 2782)
who, ICS command:                              See 5.        (line 3239)
xflash, option:                                See 4.6.      (line 2678)
year, Menu Item:                               See 3.7.7.    (line 1401)
Zoom factor in Evaluation Graph, Menu Item:    See 3.7.1.    (line 1074)
Table of Contents
*****************

Introduction
1 Major modes
2 Basic operation
3 Menus, buttons, and keys
  3.1 File Menu
  3.2 Edit Menu
  3.3 View Menu
  3.4 Mode Menu
  3.5 Action Menu
  3.6 Engine Menu
  3.7 Options Menu
    3.7.1 General Options
    3.7.2 Time Control
    3.7.3 Common Engine
    3.7.4 Adjudications
    3.7.5 ICS Options
    3.7.6 Match Options
    3.7.7 Load Game Options
    3.7.8 Save Game Options
    3.7.9 Game List
    3.7.10 Sound Options
    3.7.11 Save Settings Now
    3.7.12 Save Settings on Exit
  3.8 Help Menu
  3.9 Other Shortcut Keys
4 Options
  4.1 Chess Engine Options
  4.2 UCI + WB Engine Settings
  4.3 Tournament options
  4.4 ICS options
  4.5 Load and Save options
  4.6 User interface options
  4.7 Adjudication Options
  4.8 Other options
5 Chess Servers
6 Firewalls
7 Environment variables
8 Limitations and known bugs
9 Reporting problems
10 Authors and contributors
11 CMail
  11.1 CMail options
  11.2 Starting a CMail Game
  11.3 Answering a Move
  11.4 Multi-Game Messages
  11.5 Completing a Game
  11.6 Known CMail Problems
12 Other programs you can use with XBoard
  12.1 GNU Chess
  12.2 Fairy-Max
  12.3 HoiChess
  12.4 Crafty
Copyright
GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Index


